On Obi-Wan, Vader, & the cultural isolation of rejecting democracy
for true religion

June 10, 2020
Corey Stephan

Immediately before what could have been the greatest battle of the
Star Wars franchise (if not for poor dialogue and the bizarre
setting of Mustafar)—the long-awaited first duel between Master
Obi-Wan Kenobi and his former apprentice who had just turned to
the Dark Side and pledged his subservience to Darth Sidious—there
is a perplexing exchange:

Obi-Wan: You have allowed this Dark Lord to twist your mind, until
now…until now you’ve become the very thing you swore to
destroy.

Anakin: Don’t lecture me, Obi-Wan! I see through the lies of the
Jedi. I do not fear the Dark Side as you do. I have brought peace,
freedom, justice, and security to my new Empire.

Obi-Wan: Your new Empire?

Anakin: Don’t make me kill you.

Obi-Wan: Anakin, my allegiance is to the Republic—to
democracy.

Anakin: If you’re not with me, then you’re my enemy.

Obi-Wan: Only a Sith deals in absolutes. [Draws lightsaber.] I
will do what I must.

Anakin: You will try. [Draws lightsaber and attacks.]

Right before Kenobi draws his lightsaber, he realizes that Grand
Master Yoda was right when he said that Anakin had been “consumed”
by Darth Vader. No longer torn between love for his “brother” (as
he calls Anakin later in the duel) and duty as a Jedi, Obi-Wan
resigns himself to fight in a last-ditch effort to save the Galaxy
from its collapse into tyranny. Thus begins the scene of
hand-to-hand combat that serves as the climax not only of The
Revenge of the Sith but, rather, the whole arc of Episodes I—III.

The dialogue is forced. As elsewhere in Episodes II and III, Ewan
McGregor’s laudable performance as Obi-Wan overcomes neither a
jejune script from a lost George Lucas nor Hayden Christensen’s
unimpressive effort as Anakin. Yet by this scene at the end of the
prequel trilogy, all of that is to be expected. What has confused
me for some time is the critical line that seems to propel Obi-Wan
to draw his saber, i.e. the line that is in bold face and
underlined above: “Only a Sith deals in absolutes.”

Prima facie, Obi-Wan’s statement sounds contrary not only to the
ways of the Sith but also to the ways of the Jedi. The Jedi Code
is a list of absolutes:

There is no emotion; there is peace.
There is no ignorance; there is knowledge.
There is no passion; there is serenity.
There is no chaos; there is harmony.
There is no death; there is the Force.
https://starwars.fandom.com/wiki/Jedi_Code

Now, Christ Himself would not oppose (philosophically)
radicalizing the dichotomy between friend and foe. At Matthew
12:30 and Luke 11:23, both of which were presumably drawn from the
older Q (especially since the quotation is a saying), Jesus
states: “Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does
not gather with me scatters.” The fact that Obi-Wan, the most
philosophically astute character in the main Star Wars series
(save Yoda)—and, along with the Luke of the original trilogy, one
of the most thoroughly virtuous—opposes a statement that could be
a paraphrase of Jesus is also odd. Granted, the Star Wars universe
is its own fictional universe, and it is governed by the Force
rather than the Trinity, but good philosophy is good philosophy.

It is possible that even Obi-Wan, the most dogmatic of the major
Jedi in the main Star Wars series, had come to question the truth
value of the Code. If following the Code had led him to train the
traitor who destroyed the Jedi Order, then perhaps the Code was
faulty per se. However, this understanding fails to explain why
the statement seems natural for the Jedi Master. It does not come
across as a cry of existential angst but, rather, a definition
learned through years of study in the Temple in Coruscant.

Perhaps the sentence’s key word is the verb: deals. Obi-Wan does
not say, “Only a Sith believes in absolutes.” That statement would
be self incoherent when applied to its giver. Obi-Wan also does
not say, “Only a Sith defends or upholds absolutes.” Every Jedi
defends and upholds absolutes. Rather, he says, “Only a Sith deals
in absolutes.” Deals in might suggest regular occupation or even
obsession.

Perhaps Obi-Wan’s preceding statement is telling: “My allegiance
is to the Republic—to democracy.” Kenobi was indoctrinated to
believe that the Republic is good in itself—the self-evident will
of the (Light Side of the) Force.

Anakin’s transformation includes a fundamental rejection of the
notion that the Republic is good per se. Vader is not wrong to
observe—as Count Dooku seems to do, as well—that the Jedi Order’s
wholesale allegiance to the Republic hindered its members from
adhering to its original operative principle, which was to provide
a path for immersion in the Light Side of the Force. The Jedi are
the Galaxy’s monks, and there is something misguided about monks
becoming police officers and diplomats for a particular state.
Jedi are supposed to follow the Light, even when the Light is
contrary to some principle that otherwise seems good. Obi-Wan
should have said, “Anakin, my allegiance is to peace and reason in
the Light Side of the Force—to virtue,” but what rolled off his
tongue was his commitment to a federal government. It is likely
that Obi-Wan’s statement of allegiance only heightened the anger
toward him inside the new Sith Lord.

For a republic to function, decency must reign. Decency takes many
shapes, but it is inevitably synonymous with relativism. Live, and
let live. You do you. If he is not bothering you, leave him alone.
Everyone is entitled to her opinion. Who am I to judge? Decency
does not include dealing in absolutes. A decent person might
believe in absolutes, but she rarely (if ever) lets those
absolutes determine her outward words and actions.

Perhaps, for Master Obi-Wan Kenobi, anyone who rejects the norms
of republican civilization, i.e. anyone indecent, is a Sith. “A
Sith” is more than a literal Sith Lord; rather, “a Sith” is a
hideous outsider, the ἰδιώτης (idiot) of Athens who will not go
along with what the functioning of the republic requires. If this
interpretation is true, then Obi-Wan Kenobi is as misguided as
Darth Vader. Vader’s error is obvious—embracing evil over
goodness—but Kenobi’s error is insidious—embracing democracy as
though it were part and parcel with the Jedi religion.

It is the responsibility of the Catholic faithful to put aside
allegiance to government whenever such allegiance conflicts with
fidelity to God. From the majority perspective, “only a Sith deals
in absolutes.” Well, then, let me be a Sith. A Catholic deals in
absolutes. A Catholic is indecent. A Catholic lets absolutes
determine her outward words and actions, even when they cause
offense to others. A Catholic is more faithful to religion than to
state.

As our real-world republic (the United States of America)
struggles amidst a raging pandemic and various exchanges of
violence between police and civilians, my prayer is that we will
all remember a revised, true form of Obi-Wan’s statement for the
real world: “My allegiance is to the Church—to the Trinity.” If we
must start a new government, although we ought not follow the Dark
Side and build an evil empire, we also ought not fear the change
that true religion might require. Cultural isolation is an
infinitely small price to pay for the hope of eternity. May the
Force be with you.

Deus vos benedicat,
Corey Stephan
