Electromagnetic radiation, social distancing, & good cheer

July 19, 2020
Corey Stephan

As weeks of social distancing have dragged into months, good cheer
has become scarce. Spending quality time with someone outside of
one’s household has not been a (responsible) possibility for too
long. Even face-to-face interactions with extended family have
been replaced by video calls. With people trying to manage a host
of potential daily problems—unemployment or other financial
uncertainty, working at home rather than at work, childcare,
consolidating errands, etc.—anxiety rears its ugly head. Worst of
all, we are still separated from the sacraments. I, for one, must
find a way to attend drive-thru (or otherwise sensibly managed)
Confession in the next week or two, and I find that not being able
to venerate the Blessed Sacrament in person becomes more of a
spiritual burden with time (not less). Perhaps care for body and
care for soul should not be dichotomized. However, time is
limited.

A month and a half ago, I passed the Federal Communication
Commission’s Technician class amateur radio license exam, thereby
taking my first step into a newfound rabbit hole. The FCC allows
anyone to request a vanity call sign, so I did, and a few weeks
later I became known as N7CJS (with N7 being a non-ugly prefix
that follows the required formula and CJS being my initials).

Hams, as us amateur radio operators are called, always seem to be
in good cheer—almost to an aggravating degree. Whenever I
successfully make a transmission from my modest handheld
transceiver to one of the local repeaters (“N7CJS, listening”) and
someone else is monitoring, I can count on receiving a hearty
greeting. Hello, N7CJS! This is XXXXX. You can call me “Bob.” You
are Lima Charlie. What sort of equipment are you using? How long
have you been a ham? Are you new to this repeater? It’s a
beautiful day in southeastern Wisconsin, isn’t it? Even when the
conversation lasts only two minutes, it is warmer in tone than the
most polite interaction with a grocery store cashier or bank
teller—perhaps more akin to shooting the breeze with an old
friend.

One reason for the good cheer on amateur radio waves is that hams
follow (and enforce internally) a strict code of conduct. An
amateur radio operator is expected to be courteous at all times.
If a fellow ham should struggle to follow protocol, for example,
“XXXXX, this is YYYYY; please do A to avoid B” would be the
correct way of handling the matter. An amateur radio operator
never has the right to use a particular frequency, so first come,
first serve is an important rule of thumb. When one first tunes to
a new frequency with the intention of transmitting, he is expected
to wait for a minute or two to make sure that it is not active. If
the frequency should be in use, then he might politely announce
his call sign and say “hello” before moving to a different
frequency, or he might move onto another frequency without
bothering his fellow hams at all. He would never try to overtake
the frequency. The courtesy on amateur radio waves helps keep
everyone returning to them. Ham culture is unshakably amiable.

A deeper reason for the good cheer on amateur radio waves during
the pandemic seems to be that it is an intentional, preexisting
forum for partakers in one hobby to converse with each other while
respecting social distancing. Whereas video chat is often
cumbersome for family members and coworkers, radio communication
is ordinary for hams. When the world is topsy turvy, the mundane
is refreshing. “N7CJS, listening” is not a desperate cry for help
but, rather, a quotidian call for discussion about simple things.

On one occasion, I had the privilege of tuning into a local
repeater to hear two fellow hams discussing the use of GNU/Linux
in amateur radio. I listened for about twenty minutes (while
jogging) before I finally reached a viable position for
transmission. All that I had to do was state my call sign, thank
them for sharing their thoughts, tell them that I had similar
interests, state my call sign again, and go “clear.” What could be
more cheerful than that? Thank you, electromagnetic radiation.

Deus vos benedicat,
Corey Stephan / N7CJS
