How to make Brightspace Desire2Learn (D2L) a bit less undesirable

September 29, 2020
Corey Stephan

The Learning Management System (LMS) Brightspace Desire2Learn
(D2L) was one of a number of popular software tools that I
condemned in my free software manifesto for Catholic institutions.
Ideally, nobody would use non-free, closed source institutional
spyware, including D2L. In addition to the litany of ideological
and security-related problems that come with D2L, it also has an
oversized, counter-intuitive user interface (UI). In short,
Desire2Learn is hardly desirable.

There are a few steps that us advocates of software freedom and UI
efficiency can take to make Desire2Learn less frustrating. D2L
(probably) never will be free and open source, and it (probably)
never will sport a minimalist and useful UI. My aim with this post
is to help the reader achieve a modest overall improvement to
his/her experience with D2L—nothing more. I write this for both
instructors and students.

1. The most important improvement that anyone can make to her
experience with D2L is behind-the-scenes—namely, enhancing her Web
browser’s security. At least at Marquette University, D2L is
ridden with social media links and trackers. There are several
ways to block most of that nonsense, not only in D2L but across
the Web. For example, here is how I recommend doing so in Mozilla
Firefox:

* Set Firefox’s “Enhanced Tracking Protection” to “Strict” and 
“Send websites a ‘Do not track’ signal'” to “Always.” Select “Block
dangerous and deceptive content” and “Block pop-up windows.” Other
“Security and Privacy” settings may be adjusted as one sees fit; I
recommend choosing security over convenience.

* Install the free and open source addons “Adblock Plus” (or another
advanced advertisement blocker, such as “uBlock Origin“), “Privacy
Badger,” and “HTTPS Everywhere.” Activate strict settings in
each.

2. Brightspace D2L’s default colors are too bright for long-term
usage. Simple inverted color modes more-or-less work, but one
should use the open source Firefox addon “Dark Reader” to set the
proper dark mode for D2L that D2L should have for itself,
seamlessly turning Brightspace into a dark space.

3. Web browser font settings can improve the overall long-term
usability of D2L. In Firefox, under “Preferences” and then
“Language and Appearance,” I have my default font set to the open
source serif font “ET Book.” Under “Advanced” (“Language and
Appearance” settings), I have forced all fonts to be “ETBembo” by
choosing the “Proportional” font to be “Serif,” setting the
“Serif” and “Sans-serif” fonts as “ETBembo,” and deselecting the
option “Allow pages to choose their own fonts, instead of your
selections above.” All of D2L is now ET Book rather than the nasty
sans serif font that the website tries to use by default.

4. I find D2L’s default GUI text editing options to be clunky while
writing lengthy posts. The Web browser and Thunderbird extension
“Markdown Here,” which is meant to assist with efficiency while
writing emails, also allows general Markdown editing inside D2L
(since its core functionality is to convert a set of text written
in Markdown into email-style HTML). For example, to make a bullet
list, Markdown Here ends the silliness of tampering with D2L’s
options. Instead, one can simply type “- ” (with the space) before
each item with different amounts of tabs to change the level of an
item in the list. The only thing that one has to remember before
submitting a post is to click the Markdown Here icon to render the
Markdown text into HTML.

5. A handful of user scripts for D2L can be found on Greasy Fork,
OpenUserJS.org, and GitHub. I have the following
installed:

* csm123199’s d2l-tweaks: This might be the most important of all
user scripts for D2L. It is an actively developed set of minor
quality of life tweaks for D2L course “Content” sections to make
them more useful for both students and instructors. It is preset
to work on all D2L subdomains. (Disclaimer: I am affiliated with
the project.)

* Cengiz Gunay’s BrightSpace Grade View: This makes D2L’s grading
interface slightly less oversized for instructors. Be sure to edit
the file to include your own D2L subdomain. I have tested it in
Marquette’s D2L, and it does make a difference.

* Ecco72’s “Brightspace-Pro” series of tweaks for students. Again,
be sure to edit the file to include your own D2L subdomain.
(Disclaimer: Since I have advanced beyond taking coursework
myself, I cannot personally attest to the utility of the scripts
in this suite.)

* Here is an easy way to edit the user scripts quickly to include
one’s own D2L subdomain. In Firefox with the Greasemonkey
extension:
Click the Greasemonkey icon, then the name of the user script, 
and then “edit.” Underneath the default // @include line, add 
2 new lines with the following:
// @include *d2l.*.edu*
// @include https://*.edu/d2l/*
Type CTRL + S to save. Continue browsing. While in D2L, make sure
that the script is running by clicking the Greasemonkey icon
again. If the script is listed underneath “User scripts for this
tab,” then it should be running.

6. A handful of terminal scripts for instructors can be found on
GitHub, such as the suite of brightspace-scripts by Dr.
Christopher Phan, pl-quiz-importer by monnin to convert simple
text files into a quiz format that is able to be used by D2L, and
brightspace2excel by alexyorke to download D2L grade books as
spreadsheets. (Disclaimer: I have not yet tested these for
myself.)

7. D2L has a few built-in settings that the end user can change for
herself to improve its usability. A few UI elements can be closed
permanently by clicking on them. Further, while logged into D2L,
one can go to “Account Settings” and change the following:

* “Font Size” to the smallest acceptable size.

* “HTML Editor Settings” to “Turn off rich text editor and view
source.”

* “Signing In” to “Always appear offline.” There is rarely a reason
to appear online by default, and this option helps preserve one’s
privacy while working.

After all this, Desire2Learn should be a bit less undesirable.

Deus vos benedicat,
Corey Stephan
