DistroTube’s Interview “Theology Professor and Free Software
Advocate, Corey Stephan Ph.D.”

January 17, 2023
Corey Stephan

On October 21, 2022, I had the privilege of being interviewed by
Derek Taylor of DistroTube about my advocacy and use of free and
open source software as a professional Catholic theologian. Here,
I share a full transcript of that interview.

Theology Professor and Free Software Advocate, Corey Stephan
Ph.D.

https://odysee.com/@DistroTube:2/theology-professor-and-free-software:b?src=embed

DT: Today, I’m sitting down with a very interesting guest, because
this guest is not a Linux Distro maintainer, is not a programmer
or developer by trade. Today, I’m going to talk to a theology
professor who has a real love for free and open source software
and is a strong advocate for free and open source software. And
I’m talking to Corey Stephan. Professor Stephan, please introduce
yourself.

CS: Yes, thank you for that great introduction. So, I’m really
pleased to be on DistroTube. I’ve been a fan of this channel for
years, since back in the Obscure Window Manager Project days,
before DT got all of his fancy equipment at all of that. So, I’ve
really learned a lot from it. So, anyway, as you said, my name is
Dr. Corey Stephan. “Corey” for a good old Derek here. And I
currently serve as Assistant Professor of Theology and Fellow of
the Core at the University of St. Thomas in Houston, Texas. So,
I’m a Catholic historical theologian professionally and by
education. But I also, and together with that, do some advocacy
for free and open source software. I’ve given a talk for the
FreeBSD Foundation. I’ve written a couple of articles for the
FreeBSD Journal. I’ve given a talk for the Free and Open Source
Developers’ European meeting, FOSDEM. I blog about this stuff. And
perhaps most directly related to my work, I always tell my boss
that we should be using free software [laugh], and I have a
Statement on Software Freedom at the end of all of my class
syllabi, where I promise my students that I will work to ensure
that they’re able to have software freedom as much as reasonably
possible within the context of being at the university within my
classes. So, that’s a bit about me.

DT: Wow. People say I’m a free software zealot, but you are the
real die hard here. [Laugh]. Well, how did you get into Linux and
BSD, free and open source software? How did you discover that
philosophy?

CS: Oh, thank you. Yeah, that’s a great question. So, when I was a
freshman or sophomore in high school in the Ubuntu 8[.04] days, I
had my first laptop computer, and it was slow. It had, I think 500
megabytes of RAM, which to the greybeards will sound like, well,
that’s rather a lot, but, you know, even for that time, that was
quite low. The standard was two or four [GB].

DT: Yeah, it was, because I also had a machine during the Ubuntu
8.04 time, and I was running 512 megabytes. And even then, web
browsers would just run at a snail’s pace, yeah.

CS: Exactly. So, it came with Microsoft Winblows – Windows –
[laughs] did I almost say something crude?

DT: I’ll censor that out. Nah, I’ll leave it in. Go ahead.

CS: It came with Microsoft Windows, and I was looking for
something better, something that would be more efficient,
something that had a lot more customizability also with regard to
workflow, because even then I did not like being limited in how I
set up my working environment. I was only doing high school work
things, but I didn’t like being limited. And I did what any
millennial does when you want to find an answer to something with
regard to computers. I think I was still using Google in those
days.

DT: And it’s interesting. Yeah, the 2008 period was a real
explosion in Linux desktop popularity back then, because that was
the Vista days, where people that were using XP and loved XP
really hated Vista. So, lot of people started –

CS: Oh, that’s right. It was Vista. And so I found Ubuntu, and it
was on GNOME 2 then. And oh my goodness, did I ever fall in love
with it!

DT: And with the Comp pills, desktop or the effects. Yeah, that
was great.

CS: And then you know, I went back and forth with different
things. I was a Mac guy for several years, but basically, Macs
became worse and worse over time, too. And once again, I found
myself dissatisfied, and I went: Wait a second, I have all this
background. I already did some of this legwork in high school, and
so let me pick this up again. And that’s how I found DistroTube,
and that’s how I found RoboNuggie‘s FreeBSD channel. And just kind
of bit by bit, I grew, all self-taught, and I went from zero to
hero. So, I went from, you know, using Manjaro GNOME edition to
using a combination of having read every word on every page of
Michael Lucas’s glorious Absolute FreeBSD. Great book, by the way,
for anyone interested in UNIX-like OSes at all. It makes you
better at Linux and better at everything to do with this stuff.
And a combination of that and Derek’s videos, especially those
about spectrwm and window manager configurations and things like
that. And I wrote my own dot files from scratch. I call them
“theological-dots.” They’re on GitHub and in the FAQ. I have a
little imaginary FAQ, of course, nobody’s asking me questions
about this. I did get an email or two about them, but I have an
imaginary FAQ. And one of the questions is: “Why are these called
theological dots?” And I make a little joke, you know. Well,
they’re not blessed by a priest or something. It’s just, I’m a
theologian who uses my dot files for efficient research and
writing. And it’s great, you know, because […] things like having
a database of ancient Greek texts and a Bible study tool with six
texts open in parallel, Zotero for reference management,
LibreOffice with a bunch of extensions. The best of those
definitely is this little known but really powerful ancient Greek
extension for LibreOffice. It does spell checking even on
Byzantine Greek that’s quite accurate. It’s amazing. And so I can
have all this stuff open in parallel all, you know, tiled for me,
and it’s just wonderful. And so, I just love exploring things,
too. I think that’s probably a trait that just about all scholars
share in common is, you know, we’re nerds, and […] I was just
telling my students yesterday: How do you know that the kid who’s
going to become a scholar? It’s the 4, 5, 6 year old who won’t
stop asking his mother and then his teacher, why, why, why?

DT: Right.

CS: And so that was me, and it still is me.

DT: Yeah. I would say that’s very similar to my path as far as
timeframe and some of the reasons behind why I got into Linux, and
a lot of this stuff is really just to learn. It’s just, I was
interested in it, and I wanted to explore it. It wasn’t
necessarily out of necessity. I wouldn’t say, you know, I had to
move to Linux. It was more of, I just wanted to explore this
avenue, and the more you go down it, it’s just such a deep rabbit
hole. You’ll never learn everything. Like, it’s impossible to
learn everything.

CS: It really is impossible to learn everything.

DT: Getting back to your work at the University. I know one of the
big reasons why you advocate so strongly for free and open source
software is because you want to really champion privacy,
especially for your students because these days here in the U.S.,
especially in the schools and universities, more and more – really
ever since the lockdown, but even before the lockdown started –
these schools are forcing their students to use proprietary
software – proprietary spyware, in many cases – where students
have to keep a camera and a microphone on them all the time, even
when they’re doing their schoolwork at home. And, of course,
there’s some serious privacy concerns related to that. And not to
mention proprietary software, when you force kids to buy into one
particular piece of closed source proprietary software, you don’t
necessarily know what that company is doing with this information,
because they’re also getting the video feed and the audio feed
from your students. What’s happening with that information? No one
knows. So, you want to speak a little bit on that?

CS: Oh, that’s exactly right. So actually, a blog post I wrote
early in the days of the COVID 19 pandemic, part of it was writing
about this problem, and it’s, you know, instructors at colleges
and universities found themselves saying: Oh, well, I’ve never
done any kind of remote testing before, and so I’m just going to
default to using something like a lockdown browser – where, you
know, you’re letting your computer system be hijacked by
proprietary code, and there are people monitoring your every move,
even if you are pupils in your eyes dart one way because you’re
thinking. Well, there are all kinds of problems with this. I mean,
of course, it’s running proprietary code. You don’t know anything
about it. Hijacking a person’s private computer running on their
own home private internet connection –

DT: Who wrote the Chrome extension that these kids had to install?
I mean, that’s another thing. The universities, they don’t even
think about that stuff.

CS: It’s not equitable. So, I actually recently had a student
write to me in confidence to say, Dr. Stephan, I’m really glad
that you’re doing this, because I have a sibling who has autism,
and he’s always flagged by remote testing services as a cheater
because he can’t keep his eyes focused in one direction. And I’m
going, well, how is that, that’s not even remotely, pun intended,
fair. I mean, that’s absurd. I mean, he should, you know, he or
she should be able to have the same educational experience as
everyone else is having, and that shouldn’t matter. And so there
are lots of alternatives for remote testing […] Essay writing
always works. And something that I really like to do is have a
face-to-face video chat, oral exam, kind of like this, and just
have it be very welcoming. You can have your notes open. I don’t
want to see your bedroom. I just want to talk to you. And students
really thrive doing that. And they appreciate that. I’m not saying
I’m going to be, you know, they appreciate that I specifically
say, “I’m not going to be taking over your systems.”

DT: But oral examinations require the teacher to work a little
harder. And I think in some cases, that’s part of the problem is
just the school system’s trying to be economic as far as their
time, you know, unfortunately.

CS: No, that’s exactly right. So, the University of St. Thomas is
a small liberal arts college, and so I’m blessed that I don’t have
hundreds and hundreds of students. I might have a hundred or, you
know, total or something like that. So, it’s hard to schedule all
that, but I’m able to do so. Yeah, a full professor at a big state
university who has, you know, 2000 students in, you know, three
conglomerate lecture halls, well, that person’s not going to be
going to be able to do one-on-ones with every student. But there
are still ways of, you know, where you don’t have to be –

DT: Well, I even think at the really big institutions, you could
have enough graduate assistance also to give some of these oral
examinations, where it could … I don’t know. It’s tricky, right?
It’ll be a tough problem to solve. But I do think having a camera,
having to be on a person in their home is also a tricky situation.
I know technically they’re at school, but in real life, they’re at
home. And we’ve had court cases here in the U.S. here recently,
especially involving the workplace where companies have fired
people from working at home because they refuse to put on a camera
on them while they were working at home, because for privacy
reasons, they’re like, no, I’m not turning on the camera while I’m
in my house. And companies have fired these people and courts have
ruled in favor of these people that got fired, saying, no, you
can’t force your employees to have this camera on in their house.

CS: No, that’s exactly right. And I’ve heard of cases where
companies are hiring, say, from Silicon Valley who are doing this.
And I can, wow, can I ever commiserate with that! Because, of
course, software development is, you know, its nine parts planning
and one part executing. And it’s the exact same for me as a
historical theologian. It’s nine parts gathering all of my
resources, reading them, taking notes on them, and one part
writing. And so, if I had somebody, you know, spying on me while
I’m working and saying, oh, you haven’t typed a single word in the
last three hours, well, that would be very damaging, because I
might not have typed a word in the last three hours, but I might
have been working really hard to figure out what some obscure
piece of Greek is saying or whatever it is –

DT: I think another important same sort of point is the cost. The
fact that so many college students obviously are not wealthy, and
they have to borrow money to even go to school, borrow money to
buy books, and forcing kids sometimes to pay for proprietary
software, I think is really unfair.

CS: No, that’s exactly right. So, at the University of St. Thomas,
I have a lot of first generation students, and they’re really
bright and very hardworking. I love my students. They’re great.
But, you know, not all of them can afford very much. Some of them,
you know, they come in, and […] the best piece of technology
they’re able to have is a beat up old, retired, you know, work
laptop that an uncle gives as a gift, something like that. Or,
it’s an old, iPad two or something like that. And, you know, if
the tools that we’re requiring them to use do not run on those
devices, that’s not equitable. And not only is it not equitable, I
actually am of the opinion that it’s breach at a Catholic
university of our own ecclesial law regarding the fact that we’re
supposed to strive to make our educations accessible to as many
people as possible. Now, tuition is the greatest hurdle to that,
and part of that involves getting more donations in all of that.
But things that we can do as instructors to help with it include
things like, well, not requiring brand new multi-hundred dollars
textbook purchases, but rather –

DT: Not forcing students to buy a MacBook, which is something many
–

CS: Not forcing brand new. Yeah, exactly. You know, all of those
things we can. So, yes, you have to buy resources to be a student,
but making sure that it’s limited and sensible and that these are
things that you actually need. You actually need this textbook,
but you can buy used, and it maybe can be a lower cost version or,
you know, you have to have a laptop, computer or something you can
use for writing, but you don’t need to be running anything high
powered. You can just use Ubuntu and fire up, you know, Abiword,
and write your paper, you know, something like that, very simple.
So, that’s exactly right.

DT: Heck, you don’t even need a graphical environment on Linux to
use text editors. There’s so many command line text editors. Like,
there’s literally not a machine that doesn’t have enough power to
run the command line.

CS: No, that’s right. That’s right. Just about anybody can write a
beautiful school report using LaTeX with Vim.

DT: That’s exactly where I was going. You know, and once you get
into to Vim and LaTeX at the command line, I mean, that’s so many,
especially once you get into the math and sciences, especially
require students to eventually learn LaTeX, anyway.

CS: Exactly. So even in theology, I make a strong point of […]
really strongly encouraging students to start learning the tools
that they’re going to need to use in their respective majors – and
really in their chosen career fields – even within my class. So,
I’ll say things like, you’re doing a skit, a group skit for class
today. Well, if you’re in communications, go use this open source
script writing tool that you might use if you go work in
multimedia for a news network or something and figure it out, and
that’ll be a part of your grade. You know, […] I want to see you
flexing your stepping outside of your comfort zone knowing, you
know, with regard to computer usage, you know, points and click.
That’s very rarely the most efficient way to make use of a
computer. It’s only most efficient with dialing a phone number or
something like that. And there’s no awareness of that among
students today. And so I try to get them to have that awareness.
Yeah, there is this thing called LaTeX, and if you are in computer
science or chemistry, I want you to go dabble in it if you have
that desire to do so, to be somebody writing lab reports or, you
know, that sort of thing. I want you to dabble in this stuff. And
yeah. That’s another thing that really, I make a point of doing
that. And I try –

DT: And it’s just a weird kind of flex too, because now you have
some of your students that are also taking a physics class and
they tell their professor, they know LaTeX now, and where’d you
learn it? Well, Dr. Stephan.

CS: I’m not teaching them LaTeX. I’m just saying, I encourage you
to go learn it.

DT: You’re just pushing them in that direction, right?

CS: Right. To be totally clear. But I like that “weird flex.”
That’s really funny. And then also, you know, I try to put into
practice what I preach. So, I contacted the head of IT and I said,
can I install the new Linux on this laptop that you’ve given to
me? I know that KDE will work out of the box with the docking
setup you put in my office, and you know, nice people. But the
answer is no. So, I brought my Raspberry Pi from home with FreeBSD
on it and that’s what I’m using in my office right now because,
you know, on the Microsoft windows setup our IT provides, I can’t
even install anything. And so how am I supposed to do my work if I
have to make a phone call when I want to install Zotero or
LibreOffice or the terminal emulator that I want to use so I can
be keeping an informative IRC open on the side or whatever it is?

DT: And this is the problem with the workplace in general, these
days and so many places of business have their computers locked
down, especially their Windows machines locked down in such a way,
many times they’re running inside virtual machines. And you really
can’t do anything. You have no permissions at all to do anything
on that particular operating system on that machine. And it really
does limit the amount of work you’re able to do sometimes. I’ve
run into this situation before as well.

CS: Yeah, yeah. It really can be.

DT: Now let’s talk about some of the free and open source
software, not just for your students that you think is important
for your students, but for you personally. What free and open
source software is important to you in your work?

CS: Oh, thank you. That’s a great question. So, I think it’s
always just about what the best tool is for the given job. So,
right now I’m talking to you in Manjaro KDE with Bismuth so I can
have all of my tiling window manager key bindings set how I like
them and all of that.

DT: Is that Manjaro ARM on the Pi or is this on a … ?

CS: No, this is on a ThinkPad. So it’s the 64, you know. AMD 64.
But I have FreeBSD on my Pi in my office, and that ends up being
mostly like for doing emails and things like that.

DT: Yeah, because I was asking cause if you were on Manjaro on the
Pi, I was going to have to rethink what the Pi could do because
this has been a great stream so far as far as the video feed and
all.

CS: Oh, no, no, no, no. No, this is orders of magnitude more
powerful than a Pi. The Pi doesn’t keep up with video conferencing
at all.

DT: Not at all.

CS: Not even the Pi four. I bet the Pi five will, but –

DT: I hope so.

CS: Yeah, yeah. It’s close. It just skips a beat. So the Pi 4
does.

DT: The P 4 is so close to being able to be a desktop replacement,
other than the CPU as the bottleneck. Really. It’s just not
quite.

CS: Yeah, that’s right. That’s right. So anyway, at that level, I
really believe in using the tool for the job. So Manjaro KDE
’cause I’m docked with my ThinkPad here, and docking works out of
the box. Everything does with the latest Linux kernels, and
Manjaro makes it really easy to set up the latest kernel and all
of that. I’m even able to choose what kernel I want, which is
pretty nice.

DT: You don’t find a rolling release distribution unstable, cause
that’s what I get asked all the time.

CS: Well, I do, actually.

DT: You do? Okay.

CS: Yeah, I’ve had some problems actually with the rolling release
in the past. So, there was a LibreOffice Fresh branch update that
was pushed as a part of a Manjaro update that made my whole
dissertation uneditable for a day. That’s not fun [laughs].

DT: I’ve run into the same problems because I depend on OBS,
Kdenlive, and GIMP. I use those three tools almost every day to do
what I do. So, I’ve decided I can’t have those rolling anymore. I
don’t install them through pacman anymore. I have appimages for
them all, and I just never go get the new version. If the version
I’m on is working, I just keep that appimage. I never want that
thing to update because the update, the only thing it’s going to
do is potentially break something. It’s not going to give me
anything. If what’s working is working, there’s no need to have it
rolling.

CS: No, that’s right. So, I like it and I don’t. There are pros
and cons. Yeah, I think with this exact setup here, basically as
soon as like Debian stable has a newer kernel, I’ll just switch to
that and stay with that for time eternal. And, you know, it’s just
different needs. I really don’t need the rolling other than that
everything works out of the box right now with this exact setup.
So again, it’s all about the best tool for the job, and for this
job, that’s Manjaro right now.

DT: Now, if I didn’t do what I do with videos and didn’t need
sometimes to test out the latest and greatest software, I would be
a Debian stable user. That’s kind of what I was before starting
YouTube. I always ran static release distributions. The idea of
running a rolling release just seemed ridiculous to me until I
needed to actually test some of this software. And then, it kind
of makes sense.

CS: Yeah, yeah. That’s right.

DT: If I ever retire from YouTube, though, I’m going back to
Debian.

CS: That’s going to be the quotation that everyone places in the
comments for this.

DT: I’m going to get hate comments.

CS: I’m being very, I’m trying to be very politically neutral with
regard to what UNIX-like operating system is “best.” And then, you
know, you just said that. It’s kind of a bomb drop, so to speak.
Anyway, as far as some of the tools that I use for myself, though,
software applications that are available that are all free and
open source. I’ve talked about Zotero. That’s really, really
potent for citation management. And one thing that’s great about
that is, I mean, there’s a Firefox extension and a LibreOffice
extension, and so all three then of those great open source tools
just work together seamlessly. You know, if most library database
websites are running the same software or the same database rather
– I didn’t say that quite correctly. Anyway, most of them are
running the same stuff and Zotero detects that stuff automatically
in the extension. So you just click “Add to Library” in the
Firefox extension, and then – poof! – it’s there in Zotero locally
and being synced with Zotero’s secure server. And then, it’s just,
you know, a quick either keystroke command or one click in the
LibreOffice document to add that citation. And it is so seamless
and powerful, and it’s all completely free and open source
software. And then, within Firefox, I use a ton of extensions that
are really useful for work. It is very straining on the eyes to
read student work, for example, on a computer screen. So being
able to switch everything to dark mode. I mean, just simple things
like that, that sound so obvious, but they’re just so useful. In
LibreOffice, I normally am running a venerable suite of
extensions, a Latin language spell checker, the Greek extension
that I was talking about earlier. It’s just called Ancient Greek
and it’s available for OpenOffice and LibreOffice.

DT: And one of the things with free and open source software, we
have a ton of really good spell checkers. We have a ton of good
translation programs. Like, a lot of people that come from like
the proprietary software world, I think would be shocked at how
well we do in that particular area.

CS: No, that’s right. So, yeah, a couple of things right there. I
use a bunch of command line utility tools. There’s one called
Whitaker’s Words that’s existed for decades now, but it’s a Latin
word parsing tool, and it is so potent that it’s unbelievable, and
you know, you can compile it in any Unix like OS. It’s in the AUR
[here], you know, so on and so on. And so, normally, I just type
“latin,” hit Enter in my terminal emulator, and I get this great
word parsing, where I get the declension, I get a short definition
and – wow! – does that ever, I mean, the number of hours saved
from doing that versus opening a big physical lexicon and flipping
through the pages is absolutely uncanny. I use a Greek Bible in
the terminal and Latin Bible in the terminal. Luke Smith,
actually. Here’s another one that’s going to invoke some comments
for this video, but just to talk about his repositories that he
hosts in GitHub. A couple of things that he hosts that are really
great for community service as a whole are these terminal-based
Bibles. And I can type “grb” for Greek Bible and then say, you
know, “Mark 1,” and – poof! – there’s Mark 1 in the original New
Testament Greek or in the Latin Vulgate. By the way, for people
thinking about this stuff, oh, I’d like to do some of this,
Alacrity is actually almost essential to use because you really
have to be using a modern terminal emulator that has full modern
Unicode built into it from the ground up, or the polytonic Greek
text, for example, just doesn’t show correctly. So, it doesn’t
show in the suckless [simple] terminal.

DT: Yeah, ST is pretty good with Unicode, but it’s not Alacritty.
And I can tell you one that’s terrible. URXVT, which I know is
popular, is like the worst terminal for Unicode.

CS: That’s right. Yeah. Actually, I’ve tried both URXVT and ST,
and polytonic Greek doesn’t show correctly in either of them, but
it shows beautifully and in any monospace font that has polytonic
Greek, the Hack font has a really nice platonic Greek, Hack Nerd,
whatever. And that all shows really nicely in Alacritty. So,
that’s just an aside, you know, for people who are listening
thinking, oh, I might like to get into some of this. You’re going
to have a really bad time unless you’re using the right software
that has full modern Unicode built from the ground up, because it
won’t display all of the characters, so then you just get annoying
boxes or nothing.

DT: Well, that’s another thing with the terminal emulator getting
back to not just the special characters, but also drawing boxes
or, you know, some of the mathematical stuff people like to do,
the ligatures. You know, if you pick the wrong terminal emulator,
a lot of that stuff is just not going to render.

CS: Oh, sure. Let’s see, what else? Oh, so I’m not a Bible
scholar. I’m dealing with the history of Christianity mostly in my
work. And then, my teaching is mostly in kind of theology as a
part of traditional Catholic liberal arts. But, of course, I deal
with biblical texts all the time as a part of my work. And there’s
this Qt-based free and open source tool that runs on the SWORD
Project called BibleTime, and BibleTime, it seems like nobody
knows about it, but it’s available in every UNIX-like OS’s
repository. And it is super powerful, and the developers are
really responsive to comments to their work in GitHub. I’ve made
at least a couple of points of feedback that they’ve said, oh
yeah, we love this idea. It’s nice to hear feedback from somebody
who’s using this professionally. Let us work to improve that, you
know, for you. And that sort of thing is really great, and it’s
something that I encourage people to do as you’re looking to get
into the free and open source software world. Always give that
feedback. Something with FreeBSD that I’ll just point out that
relates to that is I was getting really annoyed with LibreOffice
in FreeBSD because it wasn’t compiled with Java by default, and
you have to have Java, the Java flag enabled at compilation of
LibreOffice, to use just about any extensions. But I thought, you
know what, this is a really friendly community. And so I went into
IRC to the #freebsd-desktop channel, and one of the people who
maintains the LibreOffice port for FreeBSD was right there. And I
said, look, for anybody who’s going to use a full-size office
software suite rather than a lightweight something else,
extensions are a big part of that, because we’re probably using it
professionally, and we probably need the extensions that let us do
our jobs professionally. And within a matter of two to three
hours, he had enabled that flag for all builds of LibreOffice for
all of FreeBSD. And that is just really cool to have those
community connections.

DT: I think a lot of people imagine that some of these software
maintainers, devs, some of the package maintainers for various
Linux distributions or for the BSD operating systems, they imagine
that these people are not going to be friendly. But that’s usually
not the case, because I’ve seen people go to like a Linux
distribution’s forums or IRC chat and say, Hey, I really depend on
this program, it’s not in your repo. And within hours somebody
will package it, just because that one person asked for it. You
know, people do this in their free time too, you know, just out of
the goodness of their heart.

CS: That’s exactly right. Another related story to that, and just
a real testimony to the friendliness of the FreeBSD ports
maintainers and kind of community overall. In the talk that I gave
for the FreeBSD, I said, you know, Zotero, we run it in wine.
There’s a group of us running a FreeBSD forum thread about how to
keep Zotero running. But I said, look, we need either Zotero or
JabRef, which is another open source citation management tool,
just for the sake of people doing professional work, whether it be
in the natural sciences or the physical sciences or mathematics or
history, whatever, doing these kinds of professional, you know,
scholarly work or writing, we need one of those two tools to be in
the ports tree and packaged. And so, I issued a little challenge,
a little call to arms, and I’m really proud to say that now there
are not one but two ports of Zotero in the FreeBSD. One that’s
based on Linuxulator, on the Linux compatibility layer, and one
that is a native build, and they’re both available. So, you can
just do “pkg install zotero,” “pkg install libreoffice,” and they
both work together now. But, you know, that responsiveness and,
you know, rather than complaining, if you’re not a person who’s
writing the code, here are a few really key rules to live by that
are somewhat professionally inspired by me, I guess, just because
of the kinds of things that I do, but also just being human. If
you’re not writing the code, always just say, “thank you.” And if
you don’t know how to make the change, find a really respectful,
targeted way to ask the question for the change to happen. So,
don’t just, you know, go on some tirade in a public facing forum
about something. Join a private IRC room and say, you know, hey,
Mr. So-And-So, I love that you’re doing this. Can we talk about an
idea to make this better for people doing this kind of work? And
that’s a great way to make positive change.

DT: Especially when you’re not paying these people anything to
help you. In some cases, these people are not asking for pavement.
They’re just there as just a service to the community. Really,
it’s just, in a lot of ways, it’s altruism, right? They’re just
trying to, which probably, now that I think about it, you being
Catholic, part of your faith, altruism, I think maybe that’s
probably why you gravitate maybe to bring open source software, I
don’t know. Maybe I’m making a connection there that isn’t there.

CS: No, there is a connection there. It’s inspired by faith and by
just the kinds of things that I do that, for example, all of my
educational video lectures that I release on Odysee, I have under
a Creative Commons license, and I want there to be academic
freedom. And I like the idea of the free exchange of ideas. I like
that … It’s very important to me that we all be working together
for the work that I do, supporting people’s education, you know,
that sort of thing, so, that’s absolutely right.

DT: And I should mention that I had actually met you on Odysee.

CS: That’s right.

DT: It’s how we did this interview, set this up is because of my
channel on Odysee and you’re on Odysee.

CS: No, that’s exactly right. And yeah, why Odysee? This is a
great line to go down. So, I’m very deliberate about all of these
things. I was going to find in my new, so in my new position, I
knew I needed to make a lot of video lectures and lessons and help
guide students through really challenging dense readings and
things like that. A lot of students where maybe their parents, you
know, English is not their first language. And so, getting into
really dense readings, it’s just a matter of guiding. And I love
doing that. It’s so rewarding and so much fun. But I wanted to
pick, I needed to pick, a platform that was accessible to students
and immediately intelligible to them while respecting their
software freedom and not putting me at risk of corporate
censorship. Because being a Catholic theologian, what are the
kinds of topics that I have to talk about all the time? Well, I
have to talk about matters of dogma and doctrine, I have to talk
about –

DT: Immorality and sin, and there’s a lot of things that could get
flagged on YouTube.

CS: I have to use words like fornication or damnation. And those
are all words that are not going to be received well in a
corporate platform like YouTube just because of the nature of what
it is. So, Odysee, I think that it gets misunderstood as like, oh,
this is a place where, you know, paranoid persons or hate mongers
go.

DT: It’s all conspiracy theories.

CS: Yeah, that’s right. But actually, why am I there? I am there
because I could not think of a better way to protect my own
academic freedom and my students’ software freedom simultaneously
than being in Odysee. And so, is it perfect? It’s absolutely not
perfect. The whole cryptocurrency thing there is, it’s goofy, to
be frank. And I’m really glad that my students just ignore that.

DT: Well, they’ve moved away from it recently, ’cause now you can
actually take donations in US dollars, and I think that’s going to
become the preferred currency on the platform now that that’s
available.

CS: Right. So, that’s not why I’m there. I’m not looking to get
paid extra by being there. But yeah, just the idea of having it
built from the ground up with freedom in mind is just very
potent.

DT: And well, as people imagine that like, there’s nobody
moderating Odysee. There’s nobody in charge. That’s not the case.
Certainly, they have to take down anyone involved in any illegal
activity, because it is a US-based company. They have to follow US
law. But unlike YouTube, they don’t have a bot that goes around
that’s triggered by certain words or images and thumbnails. And
that’s the problem with YouTube is it’s all automated and 90%,
more than 90% of the stuff that gets flagged in YouTube did not
need to get flagged. It was false positives, essentially. And
that’s what frustrates creators. It’s because you put in so many
hours of work in something, and then YouTube just deletes it. Or
sometimes, they delete entire channels, ban people, kick them off
the platform for no reason.

CS: That’s right. That’s right. Come to think of it, maybe I
shouldn’t have used those words, because this video is also going
to be on YouTube.

DT: Well, it’ll be all right.

DT: Thankfully, I’m to a size where they’re not as quick to jump
to … They’ll still demonetize a video, but I can appeal, and it
always gets reversed. I’ve never actually had anything that was
actually striked on my channel, that was striked for a legit
reason. And thankfully, I’ve been able to get all of them reversed
at some time, or another. One of them, it took me almost two
years, though, for them to finally monetize one of my videos on
Qtile, because something triggered the algorithm on a video where
I was scripting in Python. I don’t know what I said while I was
writing the Python code, but something triggered.

CS: Oh, you know, those tiling window managers [laughs]. You’re
hacking, so therefore you’re doing something mischievous.

DT: Well, I think that’s great that you’re on a free and open
source platform, like the LBRY Protocol, Odysee being a front end
to library. So, when I say, you’re a free and open source zealot
and a die hard, I mean, that’s really the case because, you’re not
on YouTube at all, are you?

CS: Well, I mean, I have a Google account.

DT: Right. Well, everybody has a YouTube account, I guess,
technically, but –

CS: But so I am on, like I subscribe to some channels there, but
generally, I won’t comment there or anything like that. And also,
you know, YouTube has just become less user-friendly over the last
couple of years.

DT: I’ve seen the comments.

CS: Yeah. If you’re not using uBlock Origin, or another effective
ad blocking tool, some videos are unwatchable.

DT: The problem with YouTube, too, is it’s a social network.
There’s a social aspect to it with the community and the comments.
But when YouTube removes so many comments because of their
algorithms, and, again, more than 90% of the comments they remove
are just false flags that, for whatever reason, Google decided to
remove these people’s comments for no reason, really benign
comments. And that frustrates people that are trying to have a
conversation. When you can’t have a conversation because the
comment, you took time, five minutes to write this paragraph, and
then it just instantly gets deleted. You know, that causes people
to explore alternatives.

CS: No, that’s right. And, you know, maybe somebody watching this
video in five years will be in a situation in which there are
better alternatives or better places to host video content, but
for right now, I just decided on Odysee.

DT: Well, Corey, one last thing I wanted to talk about with you
for free and open source software, getting away from the software
you use for work and, you know, for business essentially, right.
To earn a paycheck. What about software for fun, free and open
source gaming?

CS: [laughs] Oh, what a great question! So, obviously 0 A.D. is
the best free and open source computer game and maybe the best
computer game that exists. So, I love 0 A.D.

DT: You have a point with that one. Yeah. I think it’s one of the
best, I think it’s the best real-time strategy game out there.

CS: It’s so fun. You know, it’s built. So, I don’t get much time
for […] to do that sort of thing. I’m just so busy with work and
my wife and children and so on. But –

DT: The historian though, you being really as a theology
professor, you deal a lot with history. You probably love the
historical aspect of all the various historical figures in the
game. All the heroes, of course, are real people that, you know,
led these civilizations.

CS: Yeah. The makers of 0 A.D.. something that I love about the
project, and one reason why I really say, yeah, it’s definitely
the best free and open source game out there right now. Although
there are several that are really great and fun to play. I mean,
there are flight simulators and space simulators and all these
things, but I mean, one thing that’s so great about it is they
have a really fanatical attention to detail. And I love that. I
mean, it couldn’t be like that with a proprietary project because
you really just have to have a community-based project where a
bunch of eyes are looking over it and it’s people doing it for the
love of the thing for there to be such fanatical attention to
detail. I mean, in the forums, people are citing scholarly
publications about ancient civilizations as the reasons, you know,
for making certain decisions about what their units ought to look
like or what characteristics they ought to have.

DT: And the Greek civilizations, there’s three of them in the game
that the fact that the characters speak Greek, when you click on
them.

CS: They speak Greek. The Romans, they speak Latin. And the
pronunciation for those things, all of it is actually exquisitely
done. As in, I don’t know who the people are behind that. I want
to look into that, but I’m certain that they’ve had professional
consultations.

DT: Well, I think this is a situation where being open source
helps them because they can source all of this pronunciation from
people all over the world that would be much more familiar. You
know, for example, the correct Greek and Latin and Persian, you
know, all these languages that are in the game that a proprietary
company would actually have to go probably pay people to do, where
you could just put out a call to the community and they’ll take
care of translation for you.

CS: Yeah. And it’s not just the, I mean it’s restored or what we’d
typically call restored ancient pronunciation. So, it’s even at
the level of we want it to sound as close as we can approximate to
how the people sounded in antiquity speaking these languages. And
– oh, my goodness! – it’s just so much fun. It’s so fun, in fact,
that I’ve been asked to teach a Greek class this spring, and I’m
planning on using 0 A.D. If my dean is listening to this video
lecture, I’m going to use 0 A.D. as a highly effective educational
resource. So, that’s for my boss. But you know, there’s team
building in there, and the Greek is great, and it’s just, it’s a
lot of fun. And you can run it on anything. It’s available in
every, you know, it’s available as an appimage, so you can run it
on any GNU Linux distribution. It’s in the FreeBSD repositories,
OpenBSD, NetBSD, MacOS, Microsoft Windows. Basically, if a person
is running a computer that has a reasonably recent graphics card
or an integrated one from a recent processor, the person can run 0
A.D., and that makes it a lot of fun too, ’cause you can like, you
know, I can play against the, like, my brother and I will play
against each other and totally different [setups]. I can host it
on a ThinkPad, for Heaven’s sake. You know, that’s something.

DT: Well, I love 0 A.D., so that great to hear. And again, I think
if you’re a fan of history, you’d love the game. Everyone should
check out that game.

CS: Yeah. And you have my professional imprimatur that […] – wow!
have they ever done a good job with the attention to detail! I
mean, it’s a game. So, fun is first, but there’s other, the
attention to detail with, with making the heroes and all their
characteristics that they have and the architecture and everything
is just, it’s really good.

DT: One minor gripe I have with the game is the name of the game,
0 A.D. People often make the mistake of thinking there is actually
a year 0 A.D.

CS: Oh, right.

DT: Because even back in my school days, people would talk about
the year zero or 0 A.D. And it’s like, no, because 1 B.C., the
year after that was 1 A.D. There was no zero. There’s no year
zero.

CS: Right. And which is why they named it that was to be clever,
because it’s an imagined time that never existed, just like, for
example, it was never the case that most of these civilizations
were at war with each other. The Romans were never at war with –

DT: Like the Egyptian civilizations, Chinese, the Indian
civilizations.

CS: Yeah.

DT: But you can do the Spartans and the Persians, and that makes
sense.

CS: Right, right.

DT: So you can relive the movie 300.

CS: That’s right. Yeah. We are Sparta. Oh, it’s so much fun. You
know, one other thing that I’d just like to point out, I know that
we’re winding down here is that while I tend to stand alone right
now in the world of Catholic theology, it’s not as though the
things that I’m advocating and the reasons for them are entirely
without precedent. I mean, at the Vatican archives there are
80,000 manuscripts that are being digitized. This is a
multi-decade long process. And the file type that’s been chosen
for that is the open imaging file type that NASA produces. And
why? Well, it’s really high quality, and it’s an open standard
that will never go obsolete. So, if you’re going to go through
this extremely expensive, extremely technically precise process
that takes years and years and years with a whole team of scholars
and so on, well, of course, you need to have it be an open
standard.

DT: Now, you can’t choose a proprietary format, not for something
that you want to be able to be opened centuries from now. If you
choose proprietary software, it’s going to be obsolete within a
few years. The company that made that proprietary format could be
bankrupt within your lifetime. Right? So, it’s not like it’s going
to be around 500, thousand, 2,000 years from now. Those documents
will be lost if you depend on –

CS: Yeah, that’s exactly right. And it’s supposed to be, the end
goal for that project is to have basically all of the Vatican
archives available for the whole world in a digitized format. And
of course, they really have to be largely locked down in their
physical form because that’s the only way to protect many of
materials. But once you’ve digitized them, then anybody can look
at them in really high quality graphical images from anywhere in
the world with a high speed internet connection. And, you know,
that project is under work. And there are other projects like that
where it’s, well, of course, it’s just using open standards
because the open standards are what have the best odds of
security, they’re what have the best odds of long-term usability,
you know, so on and so on. The list just goes on of the benefits
of employing –

DT: Open source software never dies.

CS: Yeah, that’s right. That’s right […] So, those images, the
idea is that somebody could write a tool to use them on whatever,
you know, quantum computers were using, you know, 250 years from
now, which is really beautiful to think about building that for
posterity now.

DT: Well, that’s a good point. Well, Corey, would you like to
disclose any contact information? Where can people follow you
online? You got any social media accounts? Obviously, you have an
Odysee channel.

CS: Sure. So, if anyone is interested in watching videos from a
free software geek, but they’re instructional videos about
Catholic theology and history and liberal arts, you can, of
course, go to my Odysee page. My channel is just Corey Stephan,
Ph.D. But the website, which is where I blog, and I blog about
using free software, and I kind of keep everything consolidated
there, is just coreystephan.com. I like to keep things nice and
simple. I don’t like to manage a huge online presence. I like to
manage one tidy little professional presence. And so, that’s what
it is. And so, that’s the best place to go.

DT: I’ll be sure to link to those in the video description for
this video as well.

CS: Sure. And oh, and if somebody wants to write to me to ask
questions about anything, I have a little contact form right
there. And unlike a lot of private website contact forms, I keep
that up-to-date, and I always respond immediately when somebody
writes to me there. So, that’s the best way to get in touch with
me.

DT: Great. Well, Corey, thank you for talking with me today. And
thank you for all your hard work in promoting free and open source
software, and I especially appreciate that you’re fighting for
your students as far as privacy rights and our school systems and
universities. So, I want to thank you for that.

CS: Well, thank you so much, and thank you for the work that you
do. I always, I know that some people might think, oh, you know,
Derek Taylor of DistroTube, he has just this really cool job where
he just gets to sit around and talk about GNU/Linux and free
software all day. And it is a really cool job. And he does,
there’s a degree to which that’s what’s happening. But I always
describe you first as an educational content creator. As in, you
are teaching people how to be really empowered to take ownership
of our digital lives. And – wow! – I mean, thinking about it in
those terms, it’s so much more than just a really cool job. It’s
also a really important job.

DT: I appreciate that, Corey. Thanks for hanging out with me, and
I hope you have a great rest of your day.

CS: Yes. You, too. Take care.

DT: Peace.
