An Asst. Professor’s Deep Review of a Stock QuirkLogic Papyr 
E-Ink Tablet

February 18, 2023
Corey Stephan

Notate bene: I purposefully posted this review of the device with
its stock software configuration, that is, as the QuirkLogic team
intended for it to be used. I have posted a separate blog post
with a tutorial for how to modify the device to make it more
useful overall — and, I hope, to squeeze more professional
functionality from it even after the March 1, 2023 closing of
QuirkLogic’s InkWorks cloud collaboration platform.

Overview
Is this promised review also an adieux?

Last summer, after signing my contract to serve as Assistant
Professor of Theology and Fellow of the Core at the University of
St. Thomas in Houston, Texas, I decided to invest in an E-Ink
tablet to aid my research, writing, teaching, and professional
organization. After exploring several options — notably a popular
Supernote from the international, refreshingly transparent company
Ratta (more on Supernotes later) — I decided to buy a little-known
Papyr from the small Canadian company QuirkLogic. I was compelled
by the Papyr’s combination of full A4 standard paper size (close
to American Letter) and rich, native screen sharing and digital
collaboration — a harmony of useful functionality for my intended
use cases as a scholar and teacher that was not available in any
other E-Ink device at the time.

I wrote to the QuirkLogic team requesting either a short-term
review/sample device or a special educator’s discount for one to
purchase. (As my mother taught me when I was a boy, “Everything is
negotiable.”) In exchange for either a sample device or a special
discount, I promised the QuirkLogic team that I would provide
extensive critical feedback. The QuirkLogic team chiefly
advertises its devices for collaborative business environments
(executive board meetings and happenings of the kind), but I
suggested that it was limiting its potential sales by not also
targeting university faculty, that is, us so-called
teacher-scholars who make daily habits of wrestling massive
academic documents, striving to inspire undergraduate students,
and debating initiatives with our colleagues who are every bit as
aloof as ourselves. Since the QuirkLogic team is a small bunch of
friendly Canadians, a representative swiftly responded to my
inquiry by offering an open box unit for $450 (USD) instead of the
standard $600 for a brand new device (a 25% discount). That
representative noted that the QuirkLogic team as a whole had
shifted its attentions from the original Papyr to a future Papyr
2. Yet, I was pleased to accept his offer to help me begin my
service for the University as quickly as possible.

As of February 2023, there seem to be at least five public
indications that this is the end of the road for the Papyr (and
that the long-anticipated Papyr 2 never will come to market).
First, the InkWorks platform, QuirkLogic’s in-house, proprietary
cloud service on which its devices largely depend, will be going
offline on March 1 — a frustrating loss that will (greatly) reduce
the Papyr’s overall utility. Second, there has not been a single
firmware or software update for the Papyr — not even a minor
bugfix patch — in over nine months (since mid-April 2022).
Previously, the QuirkLogic team maintained a fairly steady pace of
development in which it released a major revision to the operating
system every two to four months. Third, the Papyr and Quilla
(QuirkLogic’s E-Ink touchscreen television that is designed to be
used in conjunction with the Papyr) both are listed as
out-of-stock. Fourth, the QuirkLogic team has not posted anything
(at all) to its previously frequented social media platforms
(Facebook and Twitter) since November 15, that is, three full
months ago. Fifth, finally, the QuirkLogic team’s communication
with customers, famously near-instant and cheerful, appears to be
dead, as neither I nor anyone in the usual E-Ink discussion zones
has received any response from the team members when we have
written to them or tried calling them in recent weeks (I have done
both). The sum of evidence leads me to question not only the
future of Papyr but also the future of QuirkLogic as a company.

Nevertheless, I promised the folks at QuirkLogic that I would
provide them with deep, long-term analysis. After I have used my
handy Papyr as a full-time assistant professor regularly for seven
months, I now share my promised review, whether or not anyone is
actually still at QuirkLogic to read it. Is this a farewell
message to a technological startup company that has run its
course, or is it timely critical feedback that will help that
company — in at least some small way — with bringing something
better to market for us E-Ink aficionados to enjoy? I suppose that
only time will be able to answer that question, but I will say
that a number of QuirkLogic’s employees still have themselves
listed as working there in LinkedIn (no, I am not on LinkedIn
myself). They might be having a hard time finding positions at
other companies in the midst of Alberta’s annual bitter winter, or
they might be preparing to release something fresh.
Hardware
The Papyr’s elegant display, robust constitution, and long-lasting
battery are held back by an irksome stylus and wheezing internals

The QuirkLogic Papyr is the exact same physical device as the
A4-sized Sony Digital Paper (DPT-RP1), the first-generation
Fujitsu Quaderno A4 (sold in Japan), the first-generation mooInk
Pro in the A4 size (sold in Taiwan and China), and possibly
another tablet or two. All of these units are ultimately rebranded
from devices manufactured by the Taiwanese company Netronix, and
there is good evidence that QuirkLogic re-rebranded (if I may use
such a heinous non-word) the Papyr from the Sony Digital Paper
(for example, my Papyr appears in OpenWrt’s LAN settings with the
hostname “digitalpaper-[etc.]”).

The display dazzles as a masterpiece of modern hardware
engineering. Even after seven months of routine usage, the Papyr’s
13.3″ 1650×2200 multi-touch E-Ink panel still impresses me with
its sharp production of text and lack of headache-inducing
backlight and screen refreshes (as one finds with every LCD
panel). Some of my students have marveled at the Papyr’s
paper-sized, paper-imitating E-Ink display when meeting with me in
my office on campus. One exclaimed, almost verbatim, “Wait! That
is a tablet? I thought that was paper!” The overall aesthetic is
the closest to arboreal paper that I ever have seen in any
electronic gadget. I even dare to write that it is of a wholly
different kind than the displays that were built into the 7″
e-readers that were popular among bookworms circa 2010.

A major reason why so many of us busy professionals love E-Ink
tablets is that their battery life far surpasses anything that is
even technologically possible in their LCD counterparts. Whereas
LCD panels continuously refresh many times per second (at 30 Hz,
60 Hz, 144 Hz, and so on), E-Ink displays only refresh when
specifically triggered to do so by user input. Whereas LCD panels
have power-hungry backlights, E-Ink displays do not have
backlights at all. The QuirkLogic Papyr shares these two great
power saving advantages with all other E-Ink tablets, so, like
them, its typical battery life may be measured in days to weeks
rather than the mere hours that the likes of Apple and Samsung try
to boast (looking not unlike my toddlers do when they try to
compete with me in feats of physical strength). Even under heavy
load in large shared documents set to sync continuously with
InkWorks online, the Papyr manages several honest hours of work
before it needs to be recharged. Under light load as an offline
e-reader with Wi-Fi manually disabled, I actually do not know the
limit of its battery (other reviewers seem to estimate 2-3 weeks
of 3-4 hours of reading per day for a typical E-Ink tablet).

QuirkLogic does not sell a folio or protective case for the Papyr,
but I must note two things here. First, the Papyr feels physically
invincible. Rumors circulate of small children falling on this
gadget while it is naked and it going completely unscathed (no, my
own toddlers have not even touched it). Relative to LCD panels,
E-Ink panels are far more scratch resistant, far less likely to
crack or shatter, and, well, simply more robust overall. The Papyr
is lightweight, but its shell is made of a strong, slightly
flexible plastic that obviously was designed with actual office or
school workflow integration in mind. Second, since the device
itself is the exact same as the Sony Digital Paper (DPT-RP1),
Fujitsu Quaderno A4 (gen. 1), and mooInk Pro A4, cases made for
any of those devices will work perfectly well with the Papyr.
Despite the rumors of the gadget being toddler-proof (as if such a
thing were possible), I did not wish to take any chances with my
several hundred dollar investment. After considering a few
different options, including buying a simple sleeve, I decided to
order a custom leather folio for the Quaderno A4 (gen. 1) from a
seller on Etsy who goes by the moniker DMleatherStudio. For only
$53, DMleatherStudio masterfully crafted a brown leather folio
with a perfectly sized external leather holder for the stylus
(which requires more protection than the device itself) and “Corey
J. Stephan, Ph.D.” subtly engraved on the bottom-right corner of
the front side. The total cost of that order was $57.36, and it
only took about 3 weeks from the time of purchase for me to
receive the resulting product — from China, no less.

The Papyr’s stylus works, but it would be dishonest for me to call
it anything other than annoying. It has a small lithium-ion
battery that requires regular charging to be fully operational. To
be fair, I typically only charge the stylus at the same time as I
am charging the Papyr itself. More problematically, however, the
stylus’s nibs (tips) require almost laughably frequent
replacements. At least with the firmness of my stroke, I reach for
a new nib after approximately every 8 hours of lecturing and light
note taking (far from the advertised month). Occasionally, the
Papyr misses input from the stylus’s pen, eraser, or highlighter
mode. (The stylus inputs as a pen by default but has two buttons,
one for erasing and one for highlighting.) Yet, that seems to be a
firmware issue from QuirkLogic rather than a hardware one from the
original equipment manufacturer.

The kind of stylus that comes with the Papyr — the same stylus
that also comes, of course, with the Sony Digital Paper, the
Fujitsu Quaderno A4 (gen. 1), and the mooInk Pro (gen. 1) — is the
only kind that may be used with the device. Although one now may
find a panoply of aftermarket styli for sale on Etsy, Amazon, and
elsewhere that are compatible with other devices, nothing will
work with the Papyr other than the specific type of stylus that
comes with it. It is unfortunate, then, that this particular
stylus does not seem to have been designed with basic ergonomics
in mind. It is oddly shaped, having perhaps two to three times the
diameter of a standard ballpoint pen. To make matters worse, its
two buttons are exactly where I like to keep my fingers during
normal writing. For my hands, as an adult male who wears size
medium gloves, the stylus becomes uncomfortable after only ten
minutes of continuous writing. In the interest of improving the
device’s overall usefulness for me, I often wish that I could
switch to a stylus with a suitably ergonomic design. If I ever
were to need to replace this awkward stylus, at least I should be
able to find the same kind on eBay for a reasonable price (they
regularly appear on their own with either Sony or Fujitsu
branding).

Since the stylus’s nibs are quick to reach oblivion, even the most
casual Papyr user will have no choice but to invest in a few boxes
of extras. There are two types of nib, namely, the graphite style,
which is grey and designed in imitation of the feeling of a pencil
tip, and the ink style, which is black and designed in imitation
of the feeling of a pen tip. Before ordering extra nibs, I tested
both styles (since both come in QuirkLogic’s packaging), and I
quickly found that the ink style (black, called “POM”) provided me
with a smoother writing experience than the graphite style (grey,
called “Felt”). eBay seems to have a particular abundance of
sellers who carry both kinds of nibs in Sony’s packaging (meant
for the Digital Paper). Sony’s boxes of POM nibs are labeled
“DPTA-RTP1 POM,” and its boxes of felt nibs are labeled
“DPTA-RTF1.” I placed an order from a seller on eBay who is
located here in Texas, noting that I only desired ink/black/POM
nibs. Ten nibs come inside each box, and I ordered three boxes.

Although the internal hardware of the QuirkLogic Papyr, Sony
Digital Paper (DPT-RP1), Fujitsu Quaderno A4 (gen. 1), and mooInk
Pro (gen. 1) was cutting edge relative to what was carried in
other digital paper devices that were available for purchase back
when the gadget was first assembled (in 2017), that hardware was
insufficient even at the gadget’s genesis for the very sorts of
tasks for which those four companies intended their rebranded
product to be used — and oddly outdated by the time that
QuirkLogic made the Papyr available for purchase on July 15, 2020.
One must buy any E-Ink tablet knowing that it will come at a price
premium relative to one with an LCD panel because of the display
technology’s smaller market share, but the fact that the Papyr’s
$600 list price matches (for an example from the same
manufacturing year) the launch price of Apple’s 2017 9.7″ iPad Pro
is difficult for me to swallow when I contrast their innards in a
side-by-side comparison. In June 2022, when I purchased the Papyr,
the Papyr’s cost-to-power ratio relative to the broader market’s
mainstays looked even worse. Despite the Papyr’s many benefits, I
am not sure that I would have elected to spend the full $600 for
it rather than finding one pre-owned on eBay or elsewhere.

Before purchasing the Papyr, I was suspicious that its processor
and memory would not manage all of my documents smoothly, but I
did expect it to perform better than it actually has (see my
Software review below). Most infuriatingly, the Papyr’s Marvell
IAP140 quad-core CPU and 2GB of RAM often fail to keep pace with
the large .pdf files (with, for example, Greek, Latin, German,
French, Italian, and/or other OCR text) that I frequently
annotate, resulting in repeated software crashes that make the
Papyr seem like a prototype rather than a finished product.
Moreover, the non-upgradable, measly 16GB of flash storage (with
only about 11GB being usable) only allows a modest selection of
such files to be stored on the device at any one time.

If a hypothetical Papyr 2 ever should see the light of day, then
it ought to be equipped with a faster processor, 3GB RAM or more,
32GB of storage or more (and/or a slot for a MicroSD card or some
other option for expansion), and a radically simplified stylus
that requires neither charging nor replacement parts (to take a
super note from Ratta’s Supernote devices). The original
QuirkLogic Papyr’s display is glorious, its overall constitution
is physically tough, and its battery life is shockingly strong,
but its stylus and internal hardware are both lackluster — if not
objectively unsuited for the full range of the Papyr’s own
advertised use cases.

Software
QuirkLogic’s impressively imagined software is buggy and trapped
in a dissipating cloud

Since the QuirkLogic Papyr, Sony Digital Paper, Fujitsu Quaderno
A4, and mooInk Pro are the exact same physical device, and since
the Digital Paper and Quaderno A4 (at least) were not difficult to
find available for purchase in North America when I bought the
Papyr (the mooInk Pro is a different story), purchasing the Papyr
was really a choice for the company behind the device, as well as
the software that the company was making for it.

When I purchased the Papyr, commentary had been buzzing for some
time about QuirkLogic spearheading a future in which the software
running on our E-Ink tablets in the West would be designed
natively inside Western countries rather than imported from the
Far East. Now, there is nothing wrong with imported devices (and I
enjoy the custom leather folio that I ordered from a
leatherworking company in China, as I discussed above). Yet,
Fujitsu devices, for one, tend to be reviewed as having excellent
Japanese interfaces but awkward European language interfaces. Of
course, no one can fault the user interface designers for
prioritizing their target market. More problematically, questions
about the security of devices whose operating systems are produced
by Chinese brands and sync with servers on the wrong side of the
Great Firewall ought not be taken lightly. The fact that the
Papyr’s user interface is homegrown allows it to feel both
intuitive and tidy for persons who happen to be more accustomed to
reading Latin characters than kanji, and the fact that QuirkLogic
is headquartered in Canada means that we Papyr users can be
confident that the software operates in accordance with North
American data privacy laws (and likely European, which are
better).

Previous reviewers of the Papyr made special note of the
QuirkLogic team’s commitment to updating its devices with better
drivers and software over time. For a famous example, the Papyr’s
second major operating system patch — Papyr 1.2, released just shy
of six months after the device itself — included a firmware update
that reduced the stylus’s input latency by a nearly unbelievable
margin (typically calculated at about 50%), turning writing on the
device from an actual drag to credibly imitative of real pen on
paper. I happened to purchase the Papyr only three months after
QuirkLogic released software revision 1.7, which brought with it
several important features. Notably, Papyr 1.7 introduced native
support to “Workbook” and “Book Reader” (two of the only built-in
applications) for .pdf links, enabling effective use of internally
linked e-books, calendars and other internally linked templates
that are maintained by Fujitsu for use on the Quaderno A4, and
other .pdf files of the kind (including these elegant calendars
made, and routinely updated, by kudrykv on GitHub). With each
easy-to-apply operating system patch (the full list is in
QuirkLogic’s Blog), the Papyr really did become more useful —
faster, more stable, better for collaboration, better for reading,
better for annotating, better for note taking, better for
brainstorming, and so on. From Papyr 1.2 onward, the QuirkLogic
Papyr consistently received positive reviews from all the trusted
sources, including the delightful Kit Betts-Masters of Evaluate
Everything, a secondary school physics teacher.

With everything public from QuirkLogic suggesting that the company
was destined for a brilliant future, no one could have guessed
that Papyr 1.7 would be QuirkLogic’s last operating system update
of any kind for the Papyr device, as it now seems to be. While
Papyr 1.7 is a functional system, it leaves too much to be desired
for me to be able to call it good, much less polished. Frankly,
Papyr 1.7 comes across as a public alpha release, possessing a
smattering of the tools that one might desire in such a gadget but
lacking both a few must-haves and the bug-free refinement that
would make the functions that it does have actually reliable.
Purchasers of the Papyr, myself included, expected that
QuirkLogic’s 2-year-long trajectory of improving the device with a
major operating system revision every one-to-four months would
continue with at least one more major revision, if not two, three,
or more. Even a hypothetical Papyr 1.8 by itself could have
corrected each of the three major problems that I will outline
here: the bugginess of the flagship Workbook application, the
operating system’s lack of any option for transferring documents
between the Papyr and other computers without using either Google
Drive or Dropbox, and the lack of coherence across the user
interface (between different parts of the operating system).

Before I enter into those complaints, however, I ought to give
credit where credit is due. What strikes me as the most
praiseworthy attribute of the software on the QuirkLogic is its
distraction-free simplicity. Previous reviewers were right:
QuirkLogic’s custom operating system is both convenient and
well-considered, with professional usage having been taken into
account at every level. The main menu’s set of icons to tap is so
straightforward that I suspect that it will be intelligible to the
reader even as a list in plain text. The Actions pane offers
“Return to Workbook,” “New Workbook,” “Settings,” or “Check
Update.” The Cloud Library pane offers “My Workbooks,” “Recent
Workbooks,” “Active Workbooks,” and “Shared Workbooks.” The Local
Library pane offers “My Workbooks” and “Recent Workbooks.” The
Applications pane offers “Book Reader” and “Chrome.”

As I mentioned above, the hybrid of the device-side Workbook
application and cloud-side InkWorks application (which I will call
“Workbook + InkWorks”) constitutes QuirkLogic’s flagship utility.
When they cooperate seamlessly, the experience of using the Papyr
device is, in a word, marvelous. Being able to write notes or
annotate a .pdf file on a high resolution, 13″ E-Ink display might
strike the newcomer as close to science fiction on its own, but
being able to do all of that inside an infinite canvas that is
being shared live with someone else over the WAN (Internet), who
is, in turn, able to add his/her own marks to the same document,
makes me feel like a logistics officer on the Starship Enterprise.
I have recorded over seventy video lectures (and counting) using a
cloud (online) Workbook inside InkWorks, each time writing live
notes that appear inside the InkWorks tab in Firefox that I have
open with that particular Workbook.

The previous paragraph’s most important clause is “when it works.”
The sheer bugginess of the Workbook and InkWorks applications
makes the hybrid that they form a curse to use as frequently as it
is a blessing. Since the Papyr’s software is simple (if not
simplistic) by design so that everything may revolve around
Workbook + InkWorks, it is inexcusable to find that both
applications crash so often. Even when working with a few page,
local (offline) Workbook, that is, without InkWorks, suffering at
least one crash per hour is likely. With cloud (online) Workbooks,
instability is the norm. The frequency of crashes from the
application device-side, frequency of crashes inside InkWorks in
my Web browser, and even frequency of basic Wi-Fi disconnections
(is this a 2009 Macbook?) reduces me to saying something like
“Whoops! Minor technical difficulty…” in the middle of every other
video lecture recording. What Cloud Imperium Games’ Star Citizen
is to PC gaming, QuirkLogic Workbook + InkWorks is to E-Ink tablet
usage — the most gorgeous and immersive virtual collaborative zone
ever contrived, but only for an average of one in every two to
three logins.

QuirkLogic’s decision to integrate Dropbox and Google Drive
support into the device’s operating system is swell, but it is not
swell that using either or both of those is strictly necessary for
the end user. Dropbox and Google Drive are the only two reliable
options for importing and exporting documents and e-books.
Full-size Google Chrome is a ridiculous choice of Web browser for
a device with 2GB of RAM, but it does technically work well enough
to download an occasional item from one open browser tab. Surely,
the free and open source (GPL v3) Web browser EinkBro (intended
for E-Ink tablets running Android) or similar would have made more
sense. Although I do not recall hearing or reading this from any
previous reviewer, I will state it plainly now: the Papyr runs a
heavily reskinned version of Google Android. The Papyr’s Achilles’
heel is that it is unable to send or receive files from anything
other than Google Drive or Dropbox — not even a computer running a
standard desktop operating system when connected via USB.
Requiring a WAN connection for a professional product to send or
receive files surely never could have been the QuirkLogic team’s
long-term plan, but now it seems to be where the device (at stock
settings) is trapped forever. When Dropbox and Google Drive update
their authentication methods, the device will be reduced to local
Workbook functionality and nothing more. Surely, a hypothetical
Papyr 1.8 revision could (have) brought with it WebDAV support
and/or something as simple as bidirectional USB file transfers,
but without such an update, we Papyr owners are stuck with Dropbox
and/or Google Drive as long as at least one of them continues to
work in Papyr 1.7.

Finally, I must note that even with a deliberately simple
out-of-box experience, Papyr 1.7 curiously lacks the sort of
perfect unity that one ought to expect from a finished product.
The oddest instance of 1.7’s lack of internal unity might be found
in the discrepancy of user interface between Workbook + InkWorks
and the device’s stand-alone Book Reader application. Despite the
fact that both were designed by the QuirkLogic team specifically
for the Papyr device, they have no continuity whatsoever. Indeed,
the Book Reader application does not even allow the user to change
virtual pen input thickness and color with the same convenient
action menu as Workbook (triggered by a single finger hold
anywhere in a Workbook). Instead, Book Reader, like Google Chrome,
comes across as haphazardly thrown atop the interface that the
QuirkLogic team wanted the device to contain as an anemic attempt
to appease end users’ wants. On its own, Book Reader happens to be
a handy application. I regularly make use of it, for, well,
reading books and other large documents that tend to cause
Workbook (or Workbook + InkWorks) to crash. Yet, even within
itself, Book Reader does not meet the basic demands of the rest of
QuirkLogic’s ecosystem, since it (astoundingly) lacks a way to
organize books and documents into folders. Since the QuirkLogic
team released Book Reader with Papyr 1.6, the device’s penultimate
operating system update, perhaps I ought to say that the release
of Book Reader as-is, for all the application’s own goodness, was
the first public sign that the QuirkLogic team had lost a sense of
direction.

Workflow Integration
Great for online lecturing, hit-or-miss for researching and
reading, and only useful as a notebook and status symbol for
in-person classes and meetings

Video lectures and online teaching

For the one in two to three times when Workbook + InkWorks does
function properly, it is glorious for recording video lectures
and/or doing synchronous online teaching.

For many video lectures, I take the following steps:

1. Write an A4-sized (horizontal) set of slides in LibreOffice Draw,
and export them as a .pdf file into Google Drive.
2. Import the .pdf from Google Drive into a new Cloud Workbook in the
QuirkLogic Papyr, then switch the Workbook to horizontal mode.
3. Open that Cloud Workbook in a new tab in Firefox.
4. Open guvcview to capture my webcam footage. Open
simplescreenrecorder to record that footage, everything else on my
screen (including the Cloud Workbook), and audio from my Blue Yeti
microphone.
5. Double check that my “Teaching” preset in simplescreenrecorder,
which I have set to the maximum allowed quality settings for
Odysee (in the LBRY network), is loaded. Set the path for where to
record my lecture, as well as the file name.
6. Click “Record” or tap MOD+R (my recording shortcut).
7. Glance toward pavucontrol-qt (my Pulse Audio management GUI) and
my file manager (in the directory intended for the recording) to
make sure that the recording is actually happening.
8. Teach.
9. End the recording. Save the recording. Quickly watch and listen 
to make sure that everything is as it should be.
10. Upload the final video file to my Odysee channel.

As I mentioned (multiple times) above, needing to move files
back-and-forth with Google Drive or Dropbox rather than having any
other file transfer option whatsoever for Workbook + InkWorks is
ludicrous. I cannot, however, complain about the resultant video
lectures. Many of my students have voiced their appreciation for
my video lectures’ immersive quality. I have my QuirkLogic-centric
workflow to thank for a good deal of what they notice.

For synchronous online teaching, when Workbook + InkWorks do
cooperate, the whole affair really is as simple as doing a screen
share of the Web browser tab in which InkWorks is open and happily
scribbling inside the Workbook on the Papyr device.

While instability and lack of sensible file transfer options hold
back the video lecturing and online teaching experience with stock
QuirkLogic software on the Papyr device, one would be hard pressed
to find a better overall arrangement.

Scholarly work

I have found the Book Reader application to be better overall than
Workbook for working through scholarly documents and annotating
them. For any individual large document of the kind that Workbook
probably could not handle without crashing, Book Reader is a
faster, more stable, and less power-hungry alternative to Workbook
that simply gets out of the way to let me focus on what I am
reading and annotating. It is more convenient to load something
like a 350 page dissertation into Book Reader quickly for a
reading and marking experience that is not too far from actually
using pen and paper than to pay $60 to have it printed at the
local FedEx and then need to drive to the FedEx to retrieve the
printout.

Yet, the lack of folders inside Book Reader means that it is not
viable to have more than a few e-books and other large documents
stored on the device at any one time, especially since it is
limited to 16GB of storage. Further, once again, the fact that
QuirkLogic’s own applications, including Book Reader, are strictly
limited to file importing and exporting with either Google Drive
or Dropbox is a critical handicap. I should be able to transfer my
files locally via USB or (at least) my LAN.

In the end, I consider the stock QuirkLogic software on the Papyr
device to be a mixed experience for academic study. For all the
reasons that I have mentioned so far in this review, the Papyr is
simply not as useful for research, writing, annotating, etc. as I
had hoped that it would be when I invested in the device. Yet, I
certainly have made use of it for working through a good number of
complex documents without either suffering the eye strain that
comes from reading them on an LCD panel or the financial and
environment costs that come from printing them. E-Ink is greatly
advantageous for academic life.

In-person classes and meetings

The instability and Dropbox and Google Drive exclusivity of
Workbook + InkWorks render the Papyr, which always has been
marketed primarily as a professional’s collaborative tool, inept
for actual collaborative work while either doing in-person
classroom teaching or participating in a meeting.

I do, however, like to use offline Workbooks instead of paper
notebooks for things like recording my observations during student
presentations or tracking what my colleagues say during faculty
meetings that I would like to explore further. For a typical
meeting of my department, I will load the agenda and other
relevant documents ahead of time into my continuous offline
Workbook that I have designated for the purpose. I use Workbook’s
handy bookmarking utility to save each date’s meeting as its own
entry (by date). I find it pleasant to write my meeting notes by
hand on a flat, distraction-free gadget. Unlike on a laptop (even
a godly Thinkpad), I neither need to worry about the noise of
typing (which would bother my colleagues, no doubt) nor the risk
of succumbing to my own childish temptation to check the news from
the Free Software Foundation or National Public Radio in the
middle of a lengthy interpersonal exchange that does not
particularly concern me.

Beside, with my Papyr’s matte appearance, sleek stylus, and custom
leather folio that says “Corey Stephan, Ph.D.,” the device looks
like it belongs in a professional setting. Carrying it with me
into each faculty meeting with that meeting’s relevant documents
pre-loaded became a signature of mine almost as soon as I arrived
at the University of St. Thomas. Without much exaggeration, I can
say that when my dear colleagues see me set the Papyr on the
table, they know that I mean business, especially since the brown
leather folio matches my brown leather briefcase. It is hard to
put a price tag on a tool that is able to have that effect. Bravo,
QuirkLogic. Around my colleagues, despite all of the Papyr’s
shortcomings, I sincerely call the Papyr “my third arm.”

Summary & Recommendations
A sensible purchase seven months ago is no longer fitting. What
else should an academic consider?

The QuirkLogic Papyr was the best device on the market for my
exact use cases when I purchased it 7 months ago. Especially since
I received the device with a special discount, I do not regret
spending the money on it. With both usefulness and class, the
Papyr has carried me through my first academic year as a full-time
faculty member at the University of St. Thomas. Yet, as I have
noted, the QuirkLogic team has announced that it is going to close
what has been its claim to fame since its first pitches of the
Quilla and (subsequent) Papyr — namely, the InkWorks service — on
March 1. Further, QuirkLogic might be going out of business
altogether.

Meanwhile, over the past 7 months the overall E-Ink tablet market
has changed dramatically. Onyx (the company behind the Boox
devices), Ratta (the company behind the Supernote devices), Bigme,
and several other companies have released new medium- to
large-sized E-Ink tablets with more powerful hardware, newer E-Ink
display technology, and better firmware and software features.
Some companies have scheduled even more advanced tablets for
release later this year (2023). QuirkLogic played a role in
pushing the market forward by forcing the other major players to
take professional collaboration in mind while developing and/or
reshaping their software offerings. Yet, anyone interested in
buying an E-Ink tablet now, in 2023, ought to buy something else.
What is the best choice for a scholar?

A4-sized E-Ink tablets are still rare. Onyx has a few different
options, all of which carry powerful hardware and full-featured
Android operating systems. The problem is that Onyx is patently
untrustworthy vis-à-vis both user privacy and respect for others’
intellectual property. First, rumors circulate of Onyx hacking
proprietary software applications, including office tools sold for
Android by Microsoft, (allegedly) in order to make such
applications run better on their Boox devices. Second, Onyx
operates entirely behind the Great Firewall. Purchasing a
WAN-facing device expecting all software (and software updates) to
come packaged from inside the world’s largest totalitarian state
would be an imprudent choice for any Western professional who
handles intellectual property and/or sensitive data. Third, worst
of all, it is well documented at this point that the Onyx team
sells its devices in violation of the GNU Public License (v2)
under which Linus Torvalds keeps Linux (the kernel) by refusing to
share its changes to the Linux source code when specifically asked
for them. This is intellectual property theft, a violation of
international law (disclaimer: I am neither a lawyer nor
positioned to provide formal legal opinions), and a wide-open path
for a kernel-level backdoor to steal user data and/or do other
nefarious things. As an educator who sometimes handles sensitive
information, a scholar who always handles intellectual property, a
theologian who teaches adherence to just laws, and a longtime
public advocate of software freedom, I simply will not purchase
any device from Onyx, nor will I recommend that anyone else even
consider doing so.

Lenovo is in the process of overhauling the software of its new
10.3″ (A5-sized, not A4) E-Ink tablet under the name “Lenovo Smart
Papyr,” specifically targeting professional, collaborative
environments. Early access reviews make this forthcoming device
look promising, but we will have to see updated reviews after
Lenovo actually has begun selling it (expected later this year).

There are many other options for E-Ink tablets, of course, but
they all carry their own serious shortcomings. The Remarkable 2,
the successor to the device that launched the E-Ink tablet craze,
requires a monthly subscription fee to use some of its basic
features. Bigme devices are currently either too small or too
expensive to make sense for a tightly budgeted academic frequently
working with documents in standard sizes (either A4 or American
Letter). I could continue.

While I have not tested a Ratta Supernote for myself, the sum of
the market at this moment in time (mid-February 2023) makes me
think that a Supernote device is currently the best option overall
for an academic buyer, specifically the current A5X or forthcoming
A4X2 (Ratta’s first-ever A4-sized tablet, which I hope to see come
with an increase in hardware specifications other than the display
alone). The Ratta team builds its devices’ firmware and software
transparently, having a public-facing roadmap in Trello inside
which the software developers regularly interact with community
members, soliciting feedback and/or honestly considering
suggestions. Whereas every other company’s current devices require
styli that need frequent nib replacements, Ratta carries two
different models of ergonomic styli with ceramic nibs that never
need replacing. Whereas other companies leave screen sharing and
other key collaborative features as afterthoughts, Ratta’s newest
software update includes native, easy screen sharing (over LAN,
specifically Wi-Fi). The Ratta team is committed to releasing its
transparently developed software updates to devices that people
already have bought rather than engaging in any sort of e-waste
producing planned obsolescence (I write with both Onyx and Apple
in mind). Ratta sells what are currently the most refined E-Ink
tablets on the market, and the Ratta team seems to have clever
plans for the future.

Should I have bought a Supernote instead of the Papyr? Seven
months ago, Supernotes were backordered, and they did not have
screen sharing functionality. A Papyr was the better choice.
Today, a Supernote would be the better choice.
