How to Extend the QuirkLogic Papyr’s Useful Life with F-Droid (no
rooting or hacking required)

February 19, 2023
Corey Stephan

Introduction

In my recent deep review of the QuirkLogic Papyr E-Ink tablet
(stuff/blog/b5-QuirkLogic-Review), I
purposefully focused on the device’s stock settings. Since I
promised the folks at QuirkLogic that I would provide them with
extensive critical feedback, I needed to keep my feedback focused
on the device exactly as they configured it.

Yet, each of us who owns a QuirkLogic Papyr faces an impending
doom as QuirkLogic’s announced March 1, 2023 closing date for its
proprietary, cloud-based collaborative platform called InkWorks is
almost here. I hope that this short tutorial will come as a saving
grace for at least one fellow Papyr owner.

After reading the announcement from QuirkLogic that InkWorks would
be taken offline, and, therefore, that a large amount of my
Papyr’s functionality would be eliminated overnight, I went on a
quest to find a viable solution. I turned to the dpt-tools GitHub
repository, wherein the world’s leading Sony Digital Paper, and,
therefore, Fujitsu Quaderno A4 (gen. 1), mooInk Pro A4 (gen. 1),
and, indeed, Papyr tinkerers are to be found (since, as I repeated
a few times in my full-length review, all of those devices are
actually the exact same, simply running different software),
asking if there might be a reasonable way for me to re-flash the
Papyr with Sony’s or Fujitsu’s respective operating system. I
wrote an email to the head of that repository to ask for his
assistance directly. I wrote multiple emails to the QuirkLogic
team and tried calling their office to ask for help from of them.
I asked for assistance in the official Discord server of My Deep
Guide, the Youtube channel and services of the well-established
E-Ink reviewer Vojislav Dimitrijevic. Nobody responded with any
ideas. If someone reading this blog post should have any better
option(s) for extending the Papyr’s useful life than what I
outline here, please leave a comment below.

In the face of collective silence, I started thinking: Surely,
there must be a reason why full Google Chrome is installed rather
than any more sensible Web browser for this device, and there must
be a reason why Google Drive is one of the only two options (along
with Dropbox) for it to sync files. Is this simply a heavily
modified version of Google’s Android? After all, the device at
least appeared, albeit as completely inaccessible, when I ran the
Android Debug Bridge (adb) inside my terminal emulator in
(Manjaro) GNU/Linux.

Without any other ideas, I opened Google Chrome to try downloading
F-Droid, the free and open source Android application that is
itself a catalogue of free and open source applications for
Android. After the download, I was presented with an option to
click “Install.” One week later, without needing to do any rooting
or hacking whatsoever, I have a device that is considerably more
useful than it ever was with QuirkLogic’s official software.

Simplest F-Droid Setup Tutorial

DISCLAIMER: You choose to modify your own device at your own risk.
I take no responsibility for any problems that might arise. I do
not recommend modifying anything past the point of being able to
reset the Papyr to factory settings by holding the Reset button
and/or selecting the “Reset” option inside QuirkLogic’s Settings
menu, nor (of course) am I able to suggest that any attempted
reset at any stage in your attempted modifications is certain to
be successful.

1. Open Google Chrome.
2. Navigate to f-droid.org.
3. Download F-Droid. Since Chrome is prone to crashing at this 
stage, you might need to power down the Papyr completely, turn it 
on again, and launch Chrome (and only Chrome) freshly before going
straight to f-droid.org. Eventually, the download will work. (I am
thankful for the feedback of someone who followed this tutorial
before I added this notice and had to resort to several full
reboots in order to get the download to work correctly.) Do the
same if anything should fail during any of the opening steps of
this tutorial.
4. Install F-Droid.
5. Immediately after installation finishes, without closing 
anything, launch F-Droid by clicking “Open.”
6. Once F-Droid has finished updating its own repository, the first
two things that you will need to install on your device are (1) a
new application launcher and (2) a way to change the Papyr’s home
button’s behavior so that it launches the new application
launcher. The QuirkLogic Launcher (titled “QL Launcher,” if I
remember correctly — I uninstalled it entirely a few days ago)
does not work with any custom applications. I tried several
launchers, including the famous ReLaunchX (which is specifically
designed for E-Ink tablets — more on this in the next section),
but the application launcher available on F-Droid that works the
best overall on the Papyr is the radically simple but entirely
functional Text Launcher.
Download and install Text Launcher [on F-Droid], and then
install Key Mapper [on F-Droid].
7. Shutdown the device.
8. Turn on the device. You will be greeted with the option to use
either the QuirkLogic Launcher or the Text Launcher, as well as
whether or not you wish to keep that setting permanent. Choose the
Text Launcher, and keep that setting permanent. You should be
greeted with a plain list of the applications that are currently
installed on the device.
9. Tap “Key Mapper” to launch the Key Mapper application. Tap the 
“+” at the bottom of the screen to create a new action. Tap “Record
trigger,” and tap the Home button to record that as the trigger.
Tap “add action” to add an action to it, and choose “Open Text
Launcher.” Save, and then check that tapping the home button now
actually opens the Text Launcher. If you should be greeted with
the QuirkLogic Launcher instead, since that seems to be hard-coded
into the firmware, do not panic; reboot the device, enter the Text
Launcher again, and then hold your finger on “QL Launcher” to be
greeted with the Android settings menu to uninstall it. Reboot
again, and you should be just fine. (Do not worry; everything from
QuirkLogic still works properly even without the official QL
Launcher.)
10. Congratulations. You now have a customizable Android tablet 
rather than the entirely locked down device that you purchased 
from QuirkLogic.

Getting Started

Few Android applications are developed for devices with large,
high resolution displays, even fewer are developed with E-Ink
panels in mind, and even fewer will install at all on the Papyr’s
custom version of an outdated release of Android (I think that the
operating system is based on Android 5 or 6). Here are a few tips
and tricks that I have learned over my days of tinkering with this
setup. Unless otherwise noted, every application that I discuss
here is both libre and installable inside F-Droid on the Papyr
device.

Necessities: Adding features that should be on the Papyr by
default

Although ReLaunchX does not play nicely on the Papyr as an
application launcher (having something to do with QuirkLogic’s
hard-coding of the Home button), the rest of its functionality is
superb. It works as an advanced file browser, a tool for checking
battery status, a tool for adjusting Wi-Fi settings (I have not
tested this, using QuirkLogic’s own Wi-Fi settings instead), and
more.

FTP Server (Free) works out-of-the-box to allow simple file
transfer both to and from the Papyr device over Wi-Fi, as well as
management of files that are on the device from inside a separate
computer. I have my base directory set as “/” (root); this shows
every file and folder that is possible to see on the device
without rooting. (Also, I was unable to make primitive ftpd work
properly.)

rcx, rclone for Android, allows me to sync my pCloud account with
the device in a few taps. rcx unlocks a huge array of cloud
storage solutions, including anything with WebDAV.

The device has a working Bluetooth chip. Confusingly, QuirkLogic
has Bluetooth disabled by default. You may enable Bluetooth in the
default Android Settings application (which is normally hidden
behind the QuirkLogic software). I have successfully paired the
Papyr with my Android smart phone, but I have not yet done any
actual testing of Bluetooth functionality. My assumption is that,
with enough tinkering, file transfers may be done over Bluetooth;
keyboards, headsets, controllers, and other relevant Bluetooth
gadgets can be configured to expand the Papyr’s functionality in
wholly new ways; and so on.

Although the Home button is the only physical button on the Papyr,
Key Mapper is sophisticated enough to differentiate between a
single press, a double press, a long hold, and so on. I have a
simple setup in which a quick press of the Home button opens my
application launcher of choice and a long press cycles between
Portrait mode (0°) and Landscape mode (90°), thereby allowing the
device to run any application that supports both Portrait and
Landscape modes in either orientation.

Niceties: Improving the experience of using the Papyr

EInkBro, a Web browser specifically intended for use on E-Ink
devices, and Fennec, a fully libre version of Firefox, both work
better on the Papyr than the stock Google Chrome. (Neither is
perfect, but both are better than Chrome.)

Screen Stream works brilliantly for full screen sharing over Wi-Fi
(LAN). It handles the device’s full resolution, as well as full
color, at what is a slow but non-distracting (for me) refresh
rate. It even works over the Wi-Fi at the University of St. Thomas
(my employer). I expect this to be my replacement for the Workbook
sharing functionality of InkWorks after that is no longer
available (on March 1).

Extras: A few additional goodies to help you get started

If you should be unsatisfied with Text Launcher, then you ought to
install Twisted Home Manager, which allows quick (live) switching
between different Android launchers, to help you test different
options. I actually have switched from Text Launcher to Simple Ink
Launcher (downloaded directly from Bitbucket) with everything set
to the largest viewing size.

CPU Info shows a huge amount of information about the Papyr’s
hardware, software, and more. By the way, CPU Info definitively
proves that the QuirkLogic team built its software atop Sony’s own
custom Android operating system that came with its iteration of
this same hardware gadget, that is, the Digital Paper. Many
entries inside CPU Info on the Papyr say something like “Sony,”
“Digital Paper,” or “dp.”

AnkiDroid has full integration with the AnkiWeb platform for
studying Anki decks. Be sure to activate “Safe Display Mode,”
which is partly intended for E-Ink devices (hamburger menu ->
Settings -> Advanced). I recommend turning the font scaling to the
highest available (hamburger menu -> Settings -> Appearance), and
I recommend avoiding special graphical effects. AnkiDroid does not
scale well on the Papyr’s large display (everything is a bit too
small for me, even with the system-wide font size increased from
Normal to Huge), but I do appreciate having it available.

BibleTime Mobile works well on the device in both portrait and
landscape modes. (I downloaded the latest .apk [on apkpure].)

Other Tips & Notes

The famous KOReader e-reading application does not work well on
the Papyr. First, it is slow overall, likely owing to the gadget’s
weak CPU and rather shallow 2GB of RAM. Second, there is not any
way to do handwriting within KOReader. Third, the UI does not
scale quite correctly with the Papyr’s display size, and even
small .pdf files quickly fall out of alignment. QuirkLogic’s own
Book Reader is a better choice overall for reading and interacting
with e-books and large .pdf files on the Papyr. I also recommend
the minimalistic and swift MuPDF, specifically the MuPDF mini
variant (although the full-size one should work well, too), for
quick reading of small documents on which you do not intend to
make annotations.

I recommend opening the default Android Settings menu (which was
previously hidden behind QuirkLogic’s interface), tapping
“Display,” and increasing Font size from Normal to either Large or
Huge. Although this change makes QuirkLogic’s applications look
somewhat awkward, it improves the experience of using basically
every other application. (Note that after following the tutorial
above, there will be three applications called “Settings,” two of
QuirkLogic’s own and now the default Android one.)

pCloud for Android version 3.2.3 is the newest release that I can
verify to work on the Papyr. Here is a direct download on
Uptodown. (Despite the fact that Uptodown is known to be a
trustworthy site, and the application functions as intended,
remember that any third-party download must be done with caution
and at your own risk.) Having the full official pCloud application
provides a faster, more native-like experience than relying on
rcx, including comforts like opening files from pCloud directly
inside MuPDF. For now, I will allow pCloud to be the only
aftermarket application that autolaunches (at device startup). If
this decision should negatively affect system battery life or
other performance, then I would switch back to using rcx only.
Beside, rcx does have the advantages of being libre and available
for download inside F-Droid.

There is not any clear way to install the Google Play Store, which
typically requires special privileges from Google. Beside, I do
not intend to try to install either that application center or any
other proprietary application download service. apkpure and other
websites offer .apk files for download separately from such
applications. From both F-Droid and elsewhere, every application
that I have tried installing that is listed as working with
Android prior to version 7 (especially 5) at least installs.

 
Comments

Joe H says:    
February 27, 2023 at 5:50 pm    

This is super helpful, thanks for writing it up! There’s so little
other info online.

Do you have advice on a new workflow for actually annotating and
sharing docs, esp PDFs? Are you still using the QL Ink app and if
so do you have simpler ways to do import/export?

Corey Stephan says:    
February 28, 2023 at 7:50 pm    

I am glad that you have found my tutorial to be helpful,
Joe.

I do still use QL Ink for my .pdf annotating, but I do not do so
because I have any special admiration for this particular software
application over and against any other one. Rather, I simply
cannot find another workable option for the Papyr. The problem is
that there are not any applications that I can find other than the
built-in QL Ink and (QuirkLogic’s) Book Reader that are optimized
for this particular device. I have tried several handwriting, note
taking, and document annotating programs, but I have not found a
single one that accepts the device’s stylus input without terrible
latency and/or gross inaccuracy.

If someone should find a way to install Sony’s software
applications for the Digital Paper onto the QuirkLogic Papyr
(which runs Sony’s own customized Android operating system),
*please* let us know by posting a comment here.

There is one special trick that I have found to make it so that
imports into QL Ink (not exports from QL Ink — only imports) are
not exclusively tied to Google Drive and/or Dropbox. With the
Papyr mounted as a network drive in a standard file manager (I
happen to use pcmanfm-qt mostly nowadays) via FTP, I place the
.pdf file of my choosing inside the “QLDocuments” folder (which is
accessible via multiple paths, but I tend to use
/storage/sdcard0/QLDocuments). Then, I create a new Workbook, and
when I click “Import,” I am able to select that .pdf file from the
Local directory. (The .pdf file is not available as a Workbook on
its own, of course, but it becomes available inside the “Import”
menu.)

File transferring and management via FTP (using FTP Server [Free])
is, as I discussed above, an essential improvement to quality of
life while using the Papyr. Being able to rename Workbooks,
rearrange folders, etc. all inside my desktop file manager has
saved a huge amount of time while I have been reorganizing the
device in anticipation of the closure of InkWorks (which will be
happening tomorrow). It is also useful to be able to do things
like drag and drop .apk files into the “Download” directory
(ReLaunchX reliably triggers the application installer). FTP opens
a lot of possibilities.

Oddly, I still cannot find where the imported Book Reader files
are housed (even after having run multiple recursive searches with
several different query options). My assumption is that they are
hidden inside a folder that requires root permission to
access.

Anyway, Joe, please let me know if you should find any other
important tips or tricks to keep this device working in
professional environments.

Deus te benedicat,
Corey Stephan

Farid says:    
March 20, 2023 at 1:18 pm    

dear Stephan,
Thank you very much for your blog. I installed all tools
mentionned by you. I made a big mistake. I did a factory
reset.
Now I have an unknown page with a document reader and stylus
doesn’t work anymore or not recognized.
Can you help me to regain my papyr environnement?

Thank you
Best regards
Farid

Corey Stephan says:    
March 20, 2023 at 1:24 pm    

Thank you, Farid, for commenting. Unfortunately, as I posted
plainly at the start of the tutorial itself, any modifications
that you might choose to perform are at your own risk. If the
factory reset did not work properly, and your device is
bricked/locked, seeing as the QuirkLogic team has closed its
website and all communication, then you might not have any
reasonable option(s). I suppose that you could try doing another
factory reset, but, of course, that also might not
work.

Farid says:    
March 21, 2023 at 1:08 pm    

Thank you Stephan.It seems completely locked and nothing occured
after many reset and combinations.
I think there is no way.
Maybe the solution is to find an used one with broken display and
to build one with parts.
It’s really a pity that Quirklogic team has closed and they
disable the usb data functionality on the device.
I will necessary have to buy a new one but I don’t know which one
to choice;

Corey Stephan says:    
March 21, 2023 at 2:44 pm    

I am sorry to read that, Farid. You also may try tinkering with
dpt-tools to re-flash the Papyr with Sony’s or Fujitsu’s spin of
the same core OS, but, of course, that might be even more
far-fetched. In any event, here are those tools:
https://github.com/HappyZ/dpt-tools

Robert says:    
March 30, 2023 at 10:37 pm    

I there a way to hook it up to a computer and install
f-droid?

Corey Stephan says:    
March 31, 2023 at 11:22 am    

No, there is not a way to do that. Please reread the tutorial
carefully, as well as my deep review, for more information.

PNS says:    
March 2, 2023 at 2:15 pm    

Hi…

Excellent job in investigating alternative ways of using the
Papyr, which is let down by its own software.

It makes one wonder why on earth vendors spend so much time trying
to hide the original OS (Android in this case) behind their own
front end, instead of building on top of the OS.

Maybe we should ask QuirkLogic to open the software.

Could you imagine any way of exploiting the FTP Server for
uploading PDFs to the Papyr that can be opened in the Book Reader?
I presume this is not possible, because apparently they index
content through a database.

We could use the device as an e-reader without annotation
features, if there was any PDF reader that could access local
storage. MuPDF does not seem to have such a capability.

Thanks,

PNS

Corey Stephan says:    
March 2, 2023 at 7:36 pm    

I am glad that you appreciate the tutorial, PNS.

MuPDF can access local storage. It gives that option at each fresh
opening.

As for my ideas for a .pdf reading workflow, please read my
response to Joe H.’s comment above.

Of course, there are many .pdf readers available for Android.
Please let us know which one should work the best for you (and
why).

Deus te benedicat,
Corey Stephan

PNS says:    
March 3, 2023 at 3:57 pm    

Hi…

Yes, MuPDF does access local storage. Somehow it took it quite a
bit of time to do it in my installation, but it now works.

It is not of much use, though. After opening a book, there is no
way of getting to any menu to open another.

By the way, I installed Open Launcher and it is a bit more elegant
than Text Launcher. Fonts and icons are still small (despite
setting font size to Huge in the Android Settings menu), but at
least it is a GUI.

So, we are now at the situation that we can upload PDF documents
to Papyr via the FTP Server (free), open them individually via
muPDF and having to go through the launcher again, to swith to
another document. Very cumbersome process.

You can go to file:///sdcard in Chrome and see the local storage
directory tree, but trying to open a PDF from there just crashes
Chrome.

Maybe we should petition QuirkLogic to have someone spend a few
hours to “open” their software, i.e. at least allow the Home
button to go to the home page of the launcher (instead of always
going to QL Launcher) and add F-Droid as an icon to the QL
Launcher Home screen. Also, adding an option to “Download”
documents from the local storage (instead of only GDrive and
Dropbox) would be nice.

With these 3 simple changes, the Papyr could become a much more
useful device than what it currently is.

Again, thanks for pioneering this effort.

PNS

Corey Stephan says:    
March 4, 2023 at 5:01 pm    

Thank you again, PNS. Yes, I agree that the device is still
cumbersome to use even after ‘unlocking’ it with F-Droid.

As for choice of launcher, as I noted in the tutorial, I actually
prefer Dmitriy Simbiriatin’s Simple Ink Launcher (with everything
scaled to the maximum possible sizes) to the Text Launcher. I
recommend the Text Launcher in the tutorial because it is easy to
install immediately after installing F-Droid and actually gets the
job done (unlike almost every other launcher that is available in
F-Droid). The Simple Ink Launcher, however, almost looks and runs
as though it were designed for the Papyr.

Please keep me posted with what else you find to be helpful as you
continue refining your workflow. Cheers.

Alastair Wiggins says:    
March 3, 2023 at 4:46 pm    

Mate – you are a total legend! What a find this page was. If you
ever make it to Australia, I will buy you a few beers!
Log in to Reply
Corey Stephan says:    
March 4, 2023 at 5:01 pm    

Thank you, Alastair Wiggins. Enjoy your liberated QuirkLogic
Papyr.

Deus te benedicat,
Corey Stephan

George Mikhael says:    
March 21, 2023 at 1:05 am    

Hello there sir

Thanks for this guide I really appreciate your effort to help
users of this device. I have one question.

How do I prevent my browser (I’m using E Ink Bro as per your
recommendation) from crashing when trying to download Simple Ink
Launcher from bitbucket?

Every attempt to begin the download ends with the app crashing on
the Papyr.

Corey Stephan says:    
March 21, 2023 at 7:30 am    

George Mikhael, I actually prefer to transfer .apk files to the
Papyr via FTP (the default “Downloads” folder is convenient) and
then open them for installation inside ReLaunchX (used as a file
browser — not an application launcher). Happy tinkering.

George Mikhael says:    
March 21, 2023 at 9:10 am    

Thanks so much sir, I appreciate it.

Nico says:    
March 28, 2023 at 5:20 am    

Fantastic, life-saving article. I didn’t open my Papyr for a while
and was shocked to see it was discontinued. Thank you so much
Corey, I am sure this helped more than “one fellow Papyr
owner”.

Robert Myhill says:    
April 5, 2023 at 4:02 pm    

When trying to install F-droid from the pre-downloaded apk (after
chrome has crashed and I’ve rebooted), I get “Parse Error There
was a problem parsing the package”

Can anyone duplicated this behaviour, and is there a way round the
problem? I’ve tryed rebooting about 10 times, with no joy.

TechyList says:    
April 7, 2023 at 7:59 am    

This is a great tip! I have been wanting to try this out.

Alastair Wiggins says:    
April 10, 2023 at 10:51 pm    

I have installed Floating Apps, which works surprisingly well,
even though not all of its apps are relevant (e.g. camera).

Alastair Wiggins says:    
May 30, 2023 at 8:08 pm    

Hi again Corey,
I saw the following video where you were interviewed about this
mod:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PLeiLTb-HAg
In it you say that you got the Kindle app working. Are you able to
post a link to the version you installed please? Every version I
have tried crashes or locks up.
Many thanks,
Alastair

Corey Stephan says:    
May 31, 2023 at 3:14 am    

It is nice to receive another message from you.

Regretfully, the Kindle application does not run smoothly on the
QuirkLogic Papyr. I do not recommend bothering with trying to
install it unless you only wish to use it for the occasional quick
textual lookup.

Alastair Wiggins says:    
June 5, 2023 at 7:00 pm    

No worries – I can convert any Kindle docs to PDF or EPUB and use
the native Book Reader app.

Elias says:    
May 31, 2023 at 7:26 pm    

Hello Corey, I have tried your procedure to download (and install)
f-droid, and when I download it has crashed (5 times so far), when
I power down I get the welcome screen, I close it and then go back
to f-droid, when I try to download again see get a screen asking
if I want to keep downloading fdroid(6).apk. Seems to me like
fdroid has been downloaded 5 times someplace, can I find it or do
I keep trying to power down and download until it doesn’t crash
and I can try to install?

Elias Foscolos says:    
June 1, 2023 at 7:37 pm    

following up. I did actually download the f-droid, app. WHen I
rebooted I just had to go back into chrome and launch it and get
it from the downloads and launch it there. so far so good, I got
keymapper to work, I think i will stop there for tonight. Thank
you

Corey Stephan says:    
June 2, 2023 at 6:48 am    

I am glad that it is working for you now. Enjoy.

Alastair Wiggins says:    
June 8, 2023 at 8:28 pm    

Anybody get a BT keyboard working? Looks like the BT support on
the Papyr does not extend to using input devices. Anyway, I
managed to get the following WiFi keyboard app installed, which
allows you to use any browser as a keyboard! Might be useful for
someone.
https://m.apkpure.com/wifi-keyboard/com.crintsoft.wifikeyboard

Mario says:    
June 22, 2023 at 4:29 am    

Hello!
Can anybody confirm if, after the Quircklogic servers shutdown, it
is still possibile to read PDF or Epub files from Google Drive ?
Thank you.

Joe says:    
August 14, 2023 at 12:50 pm    

Yes I am still using it to get PDFs from Google Drive.
