Awesome Theology: a curated list of open source software for
Catholic theology

October 1, 2020
Corey Stephan

One month ago, I launched the GitHub repository awesome-theology.
I intend Awesome Theology to be a new contribution to the Awesome
project. Awesome is a parent system by which “awesome lists about
all kinds of interesting topics” are made and maintained by
persons who are engaged in those topics. The Awesome Manifesto
specifies that an Awesome list must “only include actual awesome
stuff” since “it’s a curation” rather than “a collection.” To that
end, one ought only “put stuff on [a] list that [he/she] or
another contributor can personally recommend,” and one “should
rather leave stuff out than include too much.”

Many (if not most) Awesome lists pertain to computer science,
graphic design, the physical sciences, and other fields typically
associated with intensive computer usage. There seems to be a
shortage of Awesome lists about scholarship. Until now, academic
theology did not have any Awesome list at all.

The brief description for Awesome Theology is simple: “A curated
list of open source software for Catholic theology.” 
I expand:

> Awesome Theology is a catalogue of free and open source tools
that assist the workflow of professional theologians and students
taking theology classes in institutions of higher learning. It
helps people who use things like GNU/Linux, tiling window
managers, and terminal emulators work with things like ancient
Christian Latin and Greek.

With all that in mind, I have established a minimal set of
guidelines for what we contributors should include:

> projects hosted on GitHub, GitLab, & elsewhere with full source
code transparency

> tools that can be installed as local applications or cloned for
local use in some form

> software with simple interfaces & minimal bloat

> we prefer CLI & TUI, but we tolerate sensible GUI

> utilities that we have tested and actually use to assist our
work

With these guidelines, we are able to limit the scope of Awesome
Theology. Folks tend to be familiar with large websites and
databases related to their own work, and such things rightfully
hold important positions amidst the tools at our disposal. For
example, I can hardly imagine where my work would be without the
Perseus Project or the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae. However, whether
because of a lack of efficiency, non-compliance with any of the
principles of software freedom (even source code transparency),
bloat, and/or an absence of option(s) for offline usage, large
Web-based tools for theology are not awesome. Efficient, free and
open source, minimalist, and offline (locally run) software is
what I—and many other geeks—define as awesome. Awesome Theology is
a list of the kinds of tools that a geeky professional theologian
will want to open as soon as he logs into his operating system for
work: command line interface (CLI) Bibles (like those about which
I wrote before), the updated version of Whitaker’s Words (the
famous CLI Latin dictionary and word parsing tool), etc.

Awesome Theology is published under the Creative Commons Zero v1.0
Universal license, meaning that it is not copyrighted and legally
part of the public domain. Contributions are most welcome, as the
list is a persistent work in progress and specifically meant to be
a community project. As is standard for Awesome lists, I have
included a Contributor Code of Conduct (a modified version of the
Contributor Covenant that reflects and enforces the Catholicity of
this project) and a small set of Contribution Guidelines. My hope
is that everyone who is both a theologian and a GNU/Linux or BSD
using sort of geek—even if that should be only 2-3 other people
worldwide (although I am sure that there are more)—will add the
various tools that they use to this list. If anyone should object
to any part of the project, I hope that he/she will make those
objections known in order to help make it better. Awesome Theology
is a curation, and it should be awesome.

Deus vos benedicat,
Corey Stephan
