My 2025-2026 Lecture Series 
“Whimsically Encountering the Fathers of Mother Church”

October 6, 2025
Corey Stephan

I am pleased to announce that I will be delivering a 2025-2026
series of lectures at my current home parish, St. Cecilia
Catholic Church in Houston, titled “Whimsically Encountering the
Fathers of Mother Church: Ancient Voices, Modern Hearts.”

In each talk, I will bridge the academic and the devotional by
letting the Fathers themselves take charge. I will showcase,
among other things, primary excerpts of patristic writings and
some of the most compelling (and weird) stories about the lives
of the Fathers. I will encourage everyone to enjoy the ancient
treasure troves that we will explore together.

I am designing each session in this series to be self-contained.
Feel free to join whichever sessions might excite you the most.

Schedule & Registration

* Click here to register for any or all of the sessions. 
* There is a modest fee of $15 per session, which is payable inside the
registration portal. 
* Each session will take place on a Thursday at 6:30 PM.

October 23	
An Adventure into the Early Church
Voices from the Cave
A journey from Pentecost to the last Church Father, 
St. John of Damascus. Explore how the early Church grew 
and debated through powerful texts and stories.

November 20	
St. Augustine’s Catholic Legacy
From the Latin West
Discover the life and teachings of St. Augustine of Hippo, 
whose influence shaped Western Christianity.

January 22
St. Athanasius Against the World
From the Greek East
Learn how St. Athanasius defended Christ’s divinity 
and endured five exiles for the faith.

February 26	
St. Ephrem’s Potent Poetry
From the Syriac East
Explore the poetic theology of St. Ephrem the Syrian, 
whose writings challenge and inspire.

March 26 
Praying with the Church Fathers
From Their Lips to Our Hearts
Pray with the Fathers and seek their intercession as 
we strive for holiness.

Finally, here is the official advertisement (graphic) 
from the parish bulletin:

gopher://coreystephan.duckdns.org/0/phlog/cecilia.jpg
