coreystephan.com’s new minimal design (& my thanks to the Suckless
folks for inspiration)

May 27, 2020
Corey Stephan

Although I cannot endorse the hostile tone of the folks who
participate in the Suckless project (“Software that Sucks Less”
inasmuch as it is both free and open source and as minimal as
possible while functioning as intended), I am grateful for their
work. Like many GNU/Linux aficionados, I use the “Stuff that
rocks” list on the Suckless website to help me find lightweight
free and open source software. I currently use the Suckless team’s
own dmenu both in the Manjaro i3 installation on my desktop and my
custom (from scratch) installation of Debian with spectrwm on my
laptop (a project to be explained in another post). dmenu is an
exemplar of the first point of the so-called Unix Philosophy: one
package does one thing (in this case, launching applications), and
it does that one thing well.

In addition, Suckless is to thank for the overhauled design of
this website (as of two weeks ago). Since the Suckless folks’
webpage titled “The Web Sucks” contains foul language, I will not
link to it. Instead, it will suffice for me to note that they
bluntly denounce the clutter and sluggishness that have become
normal for modern websites. Javascript, images, video files, and
complicated layouts abound, despite the fact that many (if not
most) websites do not contain anything that cannot be communicated
in plain text. For example, college websites tout large, colorful
graphics with statistics (about enrollment, test scores,
graduation rates, etc.), but bullet lists could communicate the
same information more effectively.

After reading “The Web Sucks,” I realized that my own website,
although modest, had bloat:

* The theme that I chose used multiple colors, borders, and other
unnecessary design elements. Its layout caused issues in
command-line interface (CLI) web browsers like Links and
ultralight graphical user interface (GUI) web browsers like Dillo
(both of which I use). More seriously, those parts of the website
made the standard accessibility options for individuals who are
visually impaired, such as inverted colors and enlarged text,
awkward.

* For the Contact Form, I used Google’s newest version of Recaptcha,
which is a sitewide third-party tracker.
The site’s body text was produced in a sans serif font that was
not impeccably legible.

* I could not change the font or any other part of the site’s
design, since options to modify the WordPress theme that I had
chosen were locked behind a (steep) paywall.

* Even with a blazing client-side web connection, the home page took
several seconds to load in Firefox and other full-size web
browsers. Since coreystephan.com is hosted on a premium server
with solid state storage, high bandwidth, and other modern
features, its sluggishness was caused by #1 and #2.

Overall, when I first created coreystephan.com, I chose form over
function. The lockdown for the COVID-19 pandemic provided the
opportunity for me to move to a layout with functionality taking
pride of place.

I do not claim to have a sophisticated vision of effective web
design. Yet I can say, against those five problems, that a decent
website:

* has a simple layout that can be rendered in a variety of web
browsers and is accessible for persons with visual impairments

* does not contain any trackers (first- or third-party) and displays
either zero advertisements or only advertisements that are
unobtrusive and secure

* uses plainly legible fonts

* can be modified by its webmaster without difficulty
loads instantly for most clients

Although WordPress is heavy, I did not abandon it for some other
website creation tool (e.g. Hugo or another static website
generator). WordPress handles a number of things efficiently, and
I find plugins like Really Simple SSL and Polylang to be helpful.
Moreover, I already had everything configured with WordPress, and
my time is limited. Thus, I opted to move to a new theme within
WordPress. I experimented with several themes from GitHub and
WordPress.org before deciding to use Super Minimal.

I only had to modify a few lines of CSS to have Super Minimal look
and behave how I wanted. This website displays text (and almost
exclusively text), and Super Minimal handles text with aplomb. It
defaults to a free and open source, legible serif font that I
would be pleased to use in a research paper, “Gentium Book
Basic.”

Next, I abandoned Google’s Recaptcha in favor of a more secure and
lightweight anti-robot option for the Contact Form. A prompt to
fill in the blank for a standard Christian turn of phrase ought to
work, especially given the various other security protocols that I
have in place. The Simple Basic Contact Form does everything that
I need.

Finally, I reworked the message that displays on the home page and
made some other subtle changes to the site’s content.

At last, I had remedied the problems that I listed above:

* Links and Dillo render the website’s layout well. The site looks
fine in inverted colors and with the font size increased. In sum,
coreystephan.com is accessible, both for persons who use
lightweight web browsers and for persons who are visually
impaired.

* coreystephan.com is now free of any trackers or otherwise insecure
content. It passes Firefox’s strictest security and privacy
settings, Adblock Plus, and Privacy Badger without producing a
single notice.

* All text on the site defaults to a highly legible font. If Gentium
is not available on a particular device, the CSS triggers the
client to use another serif font.

* Super Minimal is a customizable WordPress theme with open CSS
editing. It is so customizable, in fact, that it is more of a
template than a normal theme.

* Because of #1 and #2, coreystephan.com now loads instantly in any
up-to-date web browser (Firefox, Links, Dillo, etc.) from any
device with a decent Internet connection.

* I suppose that I can take pride in helping make the web less
unruly, albeit in a small, small way. Thank you, Suckless folks,
for the inspiration.

Deus vos benedicat,
Corey Stephan
