Replacing Manjaro i3 with an (extremely) minimal, custom OS for
portable work: spectrwm on Debian 10

July 3, 2020
Corey Stephan

Until recently, my favorite GNU/Linux distribution was Manjaro,
which is based on Arch Linux. Manjaro is to Arch as Ubuntu is to
Debian—an overhaul of the parent distribution that is intended to
be intuitive for (nearly) all users and immediately functional on
(nearly) all desktop systems.

Manjaro with i3wm—my first tiling window manager—remains my OS for
work on my home-built desktop. Manjaro’s brilliance is
tripartite:

1. Manjaro comes with glorious presets. Until recently, especially
with the minimal .iso that is available for most editions, few
default packages ever have seemed extraneous. XFCE is the flagship
desktop environment, and KDE and GNOME editions are also
maintained by the core team. I used all three before transitioning
to i3. Moreover, the various community editions (including i3) are
not unrefined.

2. Manjaro makes using a distribution like Arch a viable option for
someone who needs to sit down and work without worrying about OS
maintenance. Volunteers delay Arch’s package updates just long
enough to test for points of instability. Relative to other
rolling release distributions, Manjaro is more leading edge than
bleeding edge.

3. Access to the Arch User Repository (to which I have contributed 
in a modest way) is a benefit that only Arch or an Arch-based
distribution can boast. The AUR is a crown jewel of the free and
open source software movement.

Yet not all is perfect with Manjaro:

* Although Manjaro (Stable branch) is more stable than a bleeding
edge rolling release distribution, there is always the possibility
that an update will break the system. I have had at least 1 update
completely break a work environment. A responsible user must read
the update notes in the (friendly) Manjaro Linux Forum before
actually running a full system update at least every few weeks.
Otherwise, thousands of packages will fall behind, leaving the
user with no choice but to reinstall the OS from scratch. That is
the price that one must pay in exchange for the overall freshness
that comes with a rolling release distribution.

* Manjaro has been on a streak of lamentable top-level
decisions:

     1. The website took a leap backward in overall usability (see my
     previous post on simplicity in web design).
	
     2. An unusual office suite (that is not worth naming) temporarily
     replaced LibreOffice.
	
     3. Flatpack (acceptable but unnecessary) and Snap (unacceptable) 
     both weaseled their way into new installations, which does not 
     make sense for a GNU/Linux distribution with full access to 
     the AUR.

     4. On  my laptop, even Manjaro i3 (installed from the minimal 
     .iso) started to feel bloated. After seeing examples of GNU/Linux
     installations that use 200mb RAM and less than 0.1% CPU at cold
     boot, 350mb RAM and perhaps 0.5% CPU seemed a bit unwieldy. On my
     laptop, with a humble dual-core Intel i3 processor, 4GB RAM, and
     (of course) the ever-present concern of battery life, every mb of
     RAM and every CPU cycle matters.

My search for a different distribution to install on my laptop was
not complicated. Ubuntu has many of the same problems as Manjaro,
and a step into Ubuntu would have seemed to me like a step into
even more bloat. However, Debian, Ubuntu’s parent, is perhaps the
most trusted standby of all GNU/Linux distributions. Debian is not
better than Manjaro in some absolute way; rather, it has its own
pros for someone who wants to use an ultra-lightweight, highly
stable OS for academic writing in multiple locations (library,
office on campus, etc.):

1. Debian is unshakable. In fact, the Stable branch of Debian is 
so slowly updated that it is unsuited for use cases that require a
new kernel with up-to-date packages (engineering, gaming, etc.).
An update in the Debian Stable branch simply will not break one’s
system. Further, since updates to Debian Stable are few and far
between, I now have more time available on my laptop to focus on
work.

2. Debian is ubiquitous. I cherish the AUR, but there is also
something endearing (and helpful) about having a gargantuan list
of packages available in my distribution’s official repositories.
Debian also receives official support from nearly all GNU/Linux
software developers who do not submit their work to its
repositories.

3. Debian is lightweight. Debian only comes with the packages that
Debian needs.

4. Debian’s developers are zealous about the free and open source
software movement. Debian does not come with any non-free
packages, and it never will. Neither Manjaro’s developers nor
Ubuntu’s can claim the same.

Thus, my choice was Debian. However, there are myriad options for
window managers and full-fledged desktop environments. Was I going
to stay with i3wm? Was I going to move to XFCE? As if by
Providence, the following video from a favorite Youtube channel of
mine, DistroTube, appeared as I was trying to make this decision:
“Spectrwm Is An Impressive Tiling Window Manager.”

Derek Taylor, the personality of DistroTube, does not exaggerate.
spectrwm is (extremely) minimal, but it also boasts an impressive
feature set. Here are my 3 favorites:

1. spectrwm is a dynamic tiling window manager. Whereas i3 and 
other manual tiling window managers require the user to move each 
window to a sensible location on his own, spectrwm automatically 
assigns a parent window (the first window opened in a workspace) 
with children (subsequent windows opened in that workspace) opening 
(by default) to its right-hand side (from top to bottom). The user 
is able to change the layout with a quick keyboard shortcut, while
preserving the relationship between the parent and children. I
have found that I prefer dynamic tiling (spectrwm) on my laptop’s
small display and manual tiling (i3) on my desktop’s large
display, since I appreciate dynamic tiling for using (relatively)
more workspaces with fewer windows per workspace and manual tiling
for fewer workspaces with more windows per workspace.

2. spectrwm has a tidy status bar that is customizable with a short
Bash script. The sample script that comes pre-loaded is fine for
someone like me who only knows a bit of Bash; I was able to edit
it for my own use without difficulty.

3. spectrwm has a legible, intuitive configuration file. 
Customizing keybindings, changing colors, and all the rest of the 
things that someone who has used a tiling window manager would 
expect to be able to do are straightforward. I think that spectrwm 
is even easier to configure than i3wm, which is famous for its 
foolproof configuration.

To install and configure Debian 10 with spectrwm, I used different
parts of the following guides:

1. “Install i3wm with Debian 10 (Buster)” by Miguel Sampaio 
da Veiga on Medium. The basic steps for installing Debian and 
any tiling manager on top are the same, so this was my main guide.

2. linux dabbler’s “SpectrwWM initial setup and config on Debian” 
and “Customizing the SpectrWM Bar” on Youtube. These instructive
videos pertain exclusively to configuring spectrwm in Debian—that
is, the window manager itself (configuration file, basic usage,
etc.).

3. Derek Taylor of DistroTube’s “Discovered Some Cool Stuff in
Spectrwm and Qtile” on Youtube.

Following the first guide in particular, I had to choose my suite
of foundational (core) software:

rxvt-unicode: urxvt, as this terminal emulator is often known, is
ubiquitous and highly configurable (in ~/.Xresources). Probably, I
will switch to Termite, which is lighter (and has a few other
advantages).

lxappearance & qt5ct: LXDE’s lightweight GTK theme switcher and a
basic Qt5 settings manager for desktop environments and window
managers without native integration of either. As minimal as one
can go while having straightforward GUI menus to manage
system-wide themes.

dmenu: The Suckless project’s application launcher.
ranger: CLI file manager with Vim-like keybindings.
X File Explorer (xfe): GUI file manager. Extremely lightweight
with remarkably few dependencies (not even GTK or Qt). xfe does
not seem to be well known, presumably because it is not part of a
desktop environment, but it works.

Links: CLI web browser. I might switch to ELinks, a fork of Links
with a few advantages, but Links is splendid.

Dillo: Lightweight, fast GUI web browser with its own rendering
engine and lots of options for customization.

Firefox & Thunderbird: Classic, powerful web browser and email
client, respectively. Heavy but necessary.

Zotero & LibreOffice: The office software that I need for writing
my dissertation. Heavy but necessary.

Xiphos: GTK implementation of the SWORD Bible study project.

i3lock: The i3wm project’s screen lock utility. Works with
Xautolock.

X Window Display Manager (XDM): X.org’s official display manager
is lightweight and does the job.

Yet Another Dotfiles Manager (yadm): A CLI tool to manage dotfiles
with git. Here is my dotfiles git repository on GitHub.
[github.com/historical-theology/theological-dots]

I decided to favor GTK whenever I need to choose a GUI
application. For a system-wide GTK theme, I chose Blackout, which
is (as the name suggests) a true black theme. Everything that I
can theme, including Dillo and urxvt, is straight black with white
text. I have spectrwm configured with a small, subtle royal purple
border around both windows and the status bar. I use the same
shade of purple in my simple i3lock Bash script (‘i3lock-corey’).
Black, white, and purple—these are my desktop’s only three colors.
Black is energy efficient and easy to configure. White text on a
black background is legible. Purple is my favorite color.

Finding a viable system-wide font was tricky. I sought a serif
font with full support for both Greek and Latin. For the font to
look as intended in both the terminal emulator and the spectrwm
bar, it had to be monospaced. UMTypewriter was the only font that
I could find that met all of those requirements. If anyone is
familiar with a smoother, more legible font that could replace
UMTypewriter, please let me know in the section for comments
below.

One challenge that I did not anticipate has been managing file
defaults (e.g. automatically opening an .odt file in LibreOffice
Writer from ranger or xfe). If anyone knows of a tool to help with
that in Debian without a full desktop environment, please let me
know.

Overall, I am pleased with the result of this project. Debian is a
terrific operating system, and spectrwm is, as Taylor titled his
video review, “an impressive tiling window manager.” Doing
academic writing while on the move now should be a more pleasant
experience for me than it ever has been before.

Deus vos benedicat,
Corey Stephan
