After Traditionis custodes, is it time for the Vatican to
reconsider ‘extraordinary’ ministries writ large?

July 28, 2021
Corey Stephan

Pope Francis’s July 16 motu proprio Traditionis custodes
(“Guardians of the Tradition”) overturned most of his predecessor
Benedict XVI’s 2007 motu proprio Summorum Pontificum (“Of the
Supreme Pontiffs”). Pope Benedict made the celebration of the Usus
Antiquior of the Roman liturgy, a.k.a. the Traditional Latin Mass
or Tridentine Mass (when discussing only the Mass and not also the
accompanying Breviary), available for all clergy in the Roman Rite
of the Universal Church, but his successor has decided to curtail
a great deal of its use.

Regarding both ecclesial documents and the extent to which
Francis’s stands in obvious opposition to Benedict’s (and as a
convenient shorthand for their differences), the past 12 days have
held an unending stream of fiery written words. With this post, I
do not intend to take a public stance on the rightness or
wrongness of the documents themselves. I am a historical
theologian — not a canon lawyer or a liturgist. I often jest that
history ended in the late thirteenth century, specifically with
St. Thomas Aquinas’s entry into eternal life in 1274. Why, then,
might I take the political hazard of making any comment whatsoever
on these contentious matters of the post-historical age? I wish to
make one (very) small observation as a call for linguistic and
legal consistency from the powers that be.

My observation (and, therefore, my call to correction) is that the
Vatican is inconsistent in setting its expectations for how
bishops ought to handle that which she officially defines as
“extraordinary.”

In Summorum Pontificum, Pope Benedict repeatedly called the Usus
Antiquior a “forma extraordinaria,” “extraordinary form,” of the
one common Roman liturgy, so that became part of its official
definition. He held that the Extraordinary Form is beyond the
confines of the ordinary, but he granted it wide tolerance out of
respect for the people’s “love and affection” for it, its long
heritage, and its spiritual strength.

When I first learned of Benedict’s use of the phrase “forma
extraordinaria,” I immediately thought of another corner of
Catholic liturgical life. In many (if not most) parishes wherein
the “forma ordinaria,” a.k.a. the Novus Ordo, is celebrated,
“Extraordinary Ministers of Holy Communion” abound. Canon 910 of
the 1983 Code of Canon Law, which introduced this term, could not
be more clear about what it means:

Minister ordinarius sacrae communionis est Episcopus, presbyter et
diaconus.
The ordinary minister of holy communion is a bishop, presbyter, or
deacon.

Extraordinarius sacrae communionis minister est acolythus necnon
alius christifidelis ad normam can. 230, §3 deputatus.
The extraordinary minister of holy communion is an acolyte or
another member of the Christian faithful designated according to
the norm of can. 230, §3.

An “extraordinary minister of Holy Communion” is so called because
he/she is not the ordinary minister. The ordinary minister is
always an ordained member of the clergy. Yet the use of
extraordinary ministers has grown into a matter of custom to the
point that it is effectively ordinary, and the Vatican seems to
remain silent. In this situation, since the practice is so
widespread as to be impossible to ignore, silence is the same as
tolerance (if not quiet approval).

Traditionis custodes does not include the phrase “extraordinary
form” in its body text, but it does in its final footnote. Thus,
it seems that Pope Francis upholds the established definition of
the Usus Antiquior. We face a bizarre situation in which the
Vatican, or at least the current Pope, broadly tolerates one
‘extraordinary’ facet of liturgy but broadly rejects another. As
matters stand today, the Vatican expects the Extraordinary Form of
the one Roman liturgy to be eschewed, while she expects
Extraordinary Ministers of Holy Communion to be embraced.

If the Extraordinary Form of the Roman liturgy is able to be
curtailed because it is only extraordinary, as the Holy Father
seems to imply, will we see equal measure against Extraordinary
Ministers of Holy Communion? As the former is a point of
contention among Catholics who favor one type of liturgy, so too
is the latter among Catholics who favor another type of liturgy.
If Traditionis custodes is really about promoting “the concord and
unity of the Church,” as it states, then I implore our hierarchs
to use more consistency. Either allow extraordinary liturgical
ministries or disallow them. Allowing some but disallowing others
is a sure way to cause general confusion among the faithful.

Deus vos benedicat,
Corey Stephan
   
Comments

John Plumride says:    
December 4, 2021 at 10:06 am    

You are correct her ein your thesis, I beleive
